krooman
One of a negro tribe of Liberia and the adjacent coast, whose members are much employed on shipboard.
dowable
Capable of being endowed; entitled to dower.
booze
To drink greedily or immoderately, esp. alcoholic liquor; to tipple.
ascus
A small membranous bladder or tube in which are inclosed the seedlike reproductive particles or sporules of lichens and certain fungi.
alizari
The madder of the Levant.
adumbrant
Giving a faint shadow, or slight resemblance; shadowing forth.
acholia
Deficiency or want of bile.
aboard
On board; into or within a ship or boat; hence, into or within a railway car.
abed
In bed, or on the bed.
abay
Barking; baying of dogs upon their prey. See Bay.
abalienate
To transfer the title of from one to another; to alienate.
abaddon
The destroyer, or angel of the bottomless pit; -- the same as Apollyon and Asmodeus.
aaronical
Pertaining to Aaron, the first high priest of the Jews.
abaca
The Manila-hemp plant (Musa textilis); also, its fiber. See Manila hemp under Manila.
abaft
Behind; toward the stern from; as, abaft the wheelhouse.
abaiser
Ivory black or animal charcoal.
abatable
Capable of being abated; as, an abatable writ or nuisance.
aband
To banish; to expel.
abase
To lower or depress; to throw or cast down; as, to abase the eye.
abawed
Astonished; abashed.
abaxile
Away from the axis or central line; eccentric.
abderian
Given to laughter; inclined to foolish or incessant merriment.
abbot
The superior or head of an abbey.
abba
Father; religious superior; -- in the Syriac, Coptic, and Ethiopic churches, a title given to the bishops, and by the bishops to the patriarch.
abbess
A female superior or governess of a nunnery, or convent of nuns, having the same authority over the nuns which the abbots have over the monks.
abbreviate
To make briefer; to shorten; to abridge; to reduce by contraction or omission, especially of words written or spoken.
abdal
A religious devotee or dervish in Persia.
abduce
To draw or conduct away; to withdraw; to draw to a different part.
abdicable
Capable of being abdicated.
abdomen
The posterior section of the body, behind the thorax, in insects, crustaceans, and other Arthropoda.
abeam
On the beam, that is, on a line which forms a right angle with the ship's keel; opposite to the center of the ship's side.
abecedary
Pertaining to, or formed by, the letters of the alphabet; alphabetic; hence, rudimentary.
abirritant
A medicine that diminishes irritation.
abhor
To shrink back with shuddering from; to regard with horror or detestation; to feel excessive repugnance toward; to detest to extremity; to loathe.
abet
To support, uphold, or aid; to maintain; -- in a good sense.
abele
The white poplar (Populus alba).
aberr
To wander; to stray.
abeyance
Expectancy; condition of being undetermined.
abhal
The berries of a species of cypress in the East Indies.
abies
A genus of coniferous trees, properly called Fir, as the balsam fir and the silver fir. The spruces are sometimes also referred to this genus.
abib
The first month of the Jewish ecclesiastical year, corresponding nearly to our April. After the Babylonish captivity this month was called Nisan.
abidance
The state of abiding; abode; continuance; compliance (with).
abigail
A lady's waiting-maid.
abiogenist
One who believes that life can be produced independently of antecedent.
abligate
To tie up so as to hinder from.
abjudge
To take away by judicial decision.
abit
3d sing. pres. of Abide.
abject
Cast down; low-lying.
ablaqueate
To lay bare, as the roots of a tree.
able
Fit; adapted; suitable.
ably
In an able manner; with great ability; as, ably done, planned, said.
abloom
In or into bloom; in a blooming state.
ablude
To be unlike; to differ.
abnegate
To deny and reject; to abjure.
abnodate
To clear (tress) from knots.
abuzz
In a buzz; buzzing.
abroach
To set abroach; to let out, as liquor; to broach; to tap.
above
In or to a higher place; higher than; on or over the upper surface; over; -- opposed to below or beneath.
aboma
A large South American serpent (Boa aboma).
abodance
An omen; a portending.
abolish
To do away with wholly; to annul; to make void; -- said of laws, customs, institutions, governments, etc.
aboral
Situated opposite to, or away from, the mouth.
abought
Imp. & p. p. of Aby.
abraid
To awake; to arouse; to stir or start up; also, to shout out.
abradant
A material used for grinding, as emery, sand, powdered glass, etc.
ical
Relating to the patriarch Abraham.
abreast
Side by side, with breasts in a line; as, "Two men could hardly walk abreast."
abridge
To make shorter; to shorten in duration; to lessen; to diminish; to curtail; as, to abridge labor; to abridge power or rights.
abstain
To hold one's self aloof; to forbear or refrain voluntarily, and especially from an indulgence of the passions or appetites; -- with from.
absence
A state of being absent or withdrawn from a place or from companionship; -- opposed to presence.
abrupt
Broken off; very steep, or craggy, as rocks, precipices, banks; precipitous; steep; as, abrupt places.
abscess
A collection of pus or purulent matter in any tissue or organ of the body, the result of a morbid process.
absinthate
A combination of absinthic acid with a base or positive radical.
absolute
Complete in itself; perfect; consummate; faultless; as, absolute perfection; absolute beauty.
aburst
In a bursting condition.
absume
To consume gradually; to waste away.
abuna
The Patriarch, or head of the Abyssinian Church.
abusable
That may be abused.
abut
To project; to terminate or border; to be contiguous; to meet; -- with on, upon, or against; as, his land abuts on the road.
accidence
The accidents, of inflections of words; the rudiments of grammar.
acalephan
One of the Acalephae.
acacia
A roll or bag, filled with dust, borne by Byzantine emperors, as a memento of mortality. It is represented on medals.
abye
To pay for; to suffer for; to atone for; to make amends for; to give satisfaction.
abysm
An abyss; a gulf.
academian
A member of an academy, university, or college.
acajou
The cashew tree; also, its fruit. See Cashew.
acardiac
Without a heart; as, an acardiac fetus.
acantha
A spine or prickly fin.
acapsular
Having no capsule.
accadian
Pertaining to a race supposed to have lived in Babylonia before the Assyrian conquest.
accede
To approach; to come forward; -- opposed to recede.
acephal
One of the Acephala.
accredit
To put or bring into credit; to invest with credit or authority; to sanction.
acclaim
To declare by acclamations.
accoast
To lie or sail along the coast or side of; to accost.
accubation
The act or posture of reclining on a couch, as practiced by the ancients at meals.
acentric
Not centered; without a center.
acetable
An acetabulum; or about one eighth of a pint.
acerate
A combination of aceric acid with a salifiable base.
acescency
The quality of being acescent; the process of acetous fermentation; a moderate degree of sourness.
ache
Continued pain, as distinguished from sudden twinges, or spasmodic pain. "Such an ache in my bones."
achaian
Of or pertaining to Achaia in Greece; also, Grecian.
achievable
Capable of being achieved.
addax
One of the largest African antelopes (Hippotragus, / Oryx, nasomaculatus).
acre
Any field of arable or pasture land.
acne
A pustular affection of the skin, due to changes in the sebaceous glands.
acinaceous
Containing seeds or stones of grapes, or grains like them.
acid
Sour, sharp, or biting to the taste; tart; having the taste of vinegar: as, acid fruits or liquors. Also fig.
achromatic
Free from color; transmitting light without decomposing it into its primary colors.
acicula
One of the needlelike or bristlelike spines or prickles of some animals and plants; also, a needlelike crystal.
acierage
The process of coating the surface of a metal plate (as a stereotype plate) with steellike iron by means of voltaic electricity; steeling.
aciform
Shaped like a needle.
acknow
To acknowledge; to confess.
acipenser
A genus of ganoid fishes, including the sturgeons, having the body armed with bony scales, and the mouth on the under side of the head.
aciurgy
Operative surgery.
aclinic
Without inclination or dipping; -- said the magnetic needle balances itself horizontally, having no dip.
acme
The top or highest point; the culmination.
acorn
The fruit of the oak, being an oval nut growing in a woody cup or cupule.
acologic
Pertaining to acology.
acnodal
Pertaining to acnodes.
acock
In a cocked or turned up fashion.
acondylous
Being without joints; jointless.
acopic
Relieving weariness; restorative.
acouchy
A small species of agouti (Dasyprocta acouchy).
acosmism
A denial of the existence of the universe as distinct from God.
acotyledon
A plant which has no cotyledons, as the dodder and all flowerless plants.
acquaint
To furnish or give experimental knowledge of; to make (one) to know; to make familiar; -- followed by with.
acrania
Partial or total absence of the skull.
aculeate
Having a sting; covered with prickles; sharp like a prickle.
actless
Without action or spirit.
acrylic
Of or containing acryl, the hypothetical radical of which acrolein is the hydride; as, acrylic acid.
acrid
Sharp and harsh, or bitter and not, to the taste; pungent; as, acrid salts.
acrobat
One who practices rope dancing, high vaulting, or other daring gymnastic feats.
actable
Capable of being acted.
actinal
Pertaining to the part of a radiate animal which contains the mouth.
actual
Involving or comprising action; active.
acton
A stuffed jacket worn under the mail, or (later) a jacket plated with mail.
actress
A female actor or doer.
acuate
To sharpen; to make pungent; to quicken.
acuition
The act of sharpening.
adansonia
A genus of great trees related to the Bombax. There are two species, A. digitata, the baobab or monkey-bread of Africa and India, and A.
adact
To compel; to drive.
acumen
Quickness of perception or discernment; penetration of mind; the faculty of nice discrimination.
acute
Sharp at the end; ending in a sharp point; pointed; -- opposed to blunt or obtuse; as, an acute angle; an acute leaf.
adage
An old saying, which has obtained credit by long use; a proverb.
adam
The name given in the Bible to the first man, the progenitor of the human race.
adatis
A fine cotton cloth of India.
adapt
To make suitable; to fit, or suit; to adjust; to alter so as to fit for a new use; -- sometimes followed by to or for.
adar
The twelfth month of the Hebrew ecclesiastical year, and the sixth of the civil. It corresponded nearly with March.
adaw
To subdue; to daunt.
adaunt
To daunt; to subdue; to mitigate.
adays
By day, or every day; in the daytime.
adjacency
The state of being adjacent or contiguous; contiguity; as, the adjacency of lands or buildings.
adequate
Equal to some requirement; proportionate, or correspondent; fully sufficient; as, powers adequate to a great work; an adequate definition.
adduce
To bring forward or offer, as an argument, passage, or consideration which bears on a statement or case; to cite; to allege.
addle
Liquid filth; mire.
addeem
To award; to adjudge.
addibility
The quantity of being addible; capability of addition.
addorsed
Set or turned back to back.
address
To aim; to direct.
ademption
The revocation or taking away of a grant donation, legacy, or the like.
adeem
To revoke, as a legacy, grant, etc., or to satisfy it by some other gift.
adelantado
A governor of a province; a commander.
adenalgy
Pain in a gland.
adeps
Animal fat; lard.
adhort
To exhort; to advise.
adhamant
Clinging, as by hooks.
adesmy
The division or defective coherence of an organ that is usually entire.
adfected
See Affected, 5.
adhere
To be consistent or coherent; to be in accordance; to agree.
adhibit
To admit, as a person or thing; to take in.
adight
To set in order; to array; to attire; to deck, to dress.
adiabatic
Not giving out or receiving heat.
adieu
Good-by; farewell; an expression of kind wishes at parting.
adipic
Pertaining to, or derived from, fatty or oily substances; -- applied to certain acids obtained from fats by the action of nitric acid.
adit
Admission; approach; access.
adoors
At the door; of the door; as, out adoors.
admonish
To warn or notify of a fault; to reprove gently or kindly, but seriously; to exhort.
adjudge
To award judicially in the case of a controverted question; as, the prize was adjudged to the victor.
adject
To add or annex; to join.
adjoin
To join or unite to; to lie contiguous to; to be in contact with; to attach; to append.
admeasure
To determine the proper share of, or the proper apportionment; as, to admeasure dower; to admeasure common of pasture.
adminicle
Help or support; an auxiliary.
adobe
An unburnt brick dried in the sun; also used as an adjective, as, an adobe house, in Texas or New Mexico.
adnascent
Growing to or on something else.
adnominal
Pertaining to an adnoun; adjectival; attached to a noun.
adolescent
Growing; advancing from childhood to maturity.
adonean
Pertaining to Adonis; Adonic.
adrian
Pertaining to the Adriatic Sea; as, Adrian billows.
adown
From a higher to a lower situation; downward; down, to or on the ground.
adoptable
Capable of being adopted.
adorable
Deserving to be adored; worthy of divine honors.
adrad
Put in dread; afraid.
adreamed
Visited by a dream; -- used in the phrase, To be adreamed, to dream.
adscript
Held to service as attached to the soil; -- said of feudal serfs.
adrogate
To adopt (a person who is his own master).
adry
In a dry or thirsty condition.
adstrict
See Astrict, and Astriction.
adsignify
To denote additionally.
adulate
To flatter in a servile way.
ague
An intermittent fever, attended by alternate cold and hot fits.
african
Of or pertaining to Africa.
aesthesia
Perception by the senses; feeling; -- the opposite of anaesthesia.
aegicrania
Sculptured ornaments, used in classical architecture, representing rams' heads or skulls.
advocacy
The act of pleading for or supporting; work of advocating; intercession.
advance
To bring forward; to move towards the van or front; to make to go on.
adunation
A uniting; union.
adust
Inflamed or scorched; fiery.
advene
To accede, or come (to); to be added to something or become a part of it, though not essential.
advice
An opinion recommended or offered, as worthy to be followed; counsel.
aecidium
A form of fruit in the cycle of development of the Rusts or Brands, an order of fungi, formerly considered independent plants.
adynamia
Considerable debility of the vital powers, as in typhoid fever.
adytum
The innermost sanctuary or shrine in ancient temples, whence oracles were given. Hence: A private chamber; a sanctum.
aedile
A magistrate in ancient Rome, who had the superintendence of public buildings, highways, shows, etc.; hence, a municipal officer.
aegean
Of or pertaining to the sea, or arm of the Mediterranean sea, east of Greece. See Archipelago.
aerate
To combine or charge with gas; usually with carbonic acid gas, formerly called fixed air.
aeolian
Of or pertaining to Aeolia or Aeolis, in Asia Minor, colonized by the Greeks, or to its inhabitants; aeolic; as, the Aeolian dialect.
aegrotat
A medical certificate that a student is ill.
aeneid
The great epic poem of Virgil, of which the hero is Aeneas.
aeon
A period of immeasurable duration; also, an emanation of the Deity. See Eon.
aepyornis
A gigantic bird found fossil in Madagascar.
aeruginous
Of the nature or color of verdigris, or the rust of copper.
aerial
Consisting of air; resembling, or partaking of the nature of air. Hence: Unsubstantial; unreal.
aerobiotic
Related to, or of the nature of, aerobies; as, aerobiotic plants, which live only when supplied with free oxygen.
aery
Aerial; ethereal; incorporeal; visionary.
esopian
Of or pertaining to Aesop, or in his manner.
affy
To confide (one's self to, or in); to trust.
affect
To act upon; to produce an effect or change upon.
afar
At, to, or from a great distance; far away; -- often used with from preceding, or off following; as, he was seen from afar; I saw him afar off.
aethogen
A compound of nitrogen and boro/, which, when heated before the blowpipe, gives a brilliant phosphorescent; boric nitride.
aetiology
The assignment of a cause.
afer
The southwest wind.
affability
The quality of being affable; readiness to converse; courteousness in receiving others and in conversation; complaisant behavior.
afforce
To reenforce; to strengthen.
affiance
Plighted faith; marriage contract or promise.
afflation
A blowing or breathing on; inspiration.
affrap
To strike, or strike down.
affuse
To pour out or upon.
aflush
In a flushed or blushing state.
aflame
Inflames; glowing with light or passion; ablaze.
afghan
Of or pertaining to Afghanistan.
afield
To, in, or on the field.
aflicker
In a flickering state.
afloat
Borne on the water; floating; on board ship.
afore
In the fore part of a vessel.
afoam
In a foaming state; as, the sea is all afoam.
afoot
Fig.: In motion; in action; astir; in progress.
afraid
Impressed with fear or apprehension; in fear; apprehensive.
afoul
In collision; entangled.
afresh
Anew; again; once more; newly.
agible
Possible to be done; practicable.
agasp
In a state of gasping.
agha
In Turkey, a commander or chief officer. It is used also as a title of respect.
after
Next; later in time; subsequent; succeeding; as, an after period of life.
afreet
A powerful evil jinnee, demon, or monstrous giant.
afront
In front; face to face.
aftmost
Nearest the stern.
aftward
Toward the stern.
agama
A genus of lizards, one of the few which feed upon vegetable substances; also, one of these lizards.
again
In return, back; as, bring us word again.
agalaxy
Failure of the due secretion of milk after childbirth.
agape
Gaping, as with wonder, expectation, or eager attention.
agaric
A fungus of the genus Agaricus, of many species, of which the common mushroom is an example.
ageless
Without old age limits of duration; as, fountains of ageless youth.
agave
A genus of plants (order Amaryllidaceae) of which the chief species is the maguey or century plant (A.
agastric
Having to stomach, or distinct digestive canal, as the tapeworm.
agate
On the way; agoing; as, to be agate; to set the bells agate.
agazed
Gazing with astonishment; amazed.
aged
Old; having lived long; having lived almost to or beyond the usual time allotted to that species of being; as, an aged man; an aged oak.
agger
An earthwork; a mound; a raised work.
agency
The faculty of acting or of exerting power; the state of being in action; action; instrumentality.
ageratum
A genus of plants, one species of which (A. Mexicanum) has lavender-blue flowers in dense clusters.
aggrace
To favor; to grace.
aghast
See Agast, v. t.
agnize
To recognize; to acknowledge.
aiglet
A tag of a lace or of the points, braids, or cords formerly used in dress. They were sometimes formed into small images.
agistor
Now, one who agists or takes in cattle to pasture at a certain rate; a pasturer.
agile
Having the faculty of quick motion in the limbs; apt or ready to move; nimble; active; as, an agile boy; an agile tongue.
agio
The premium or percentage on a better sort of money when it is given in exchange for an inferior sort.
agitable
Capable of being agitated, or easily moved.
agleam
Gleaming; as, faces agleam.
aglutition
Inability to swallow.
aglimmer
In a glimmering state.
aglossal
Without tongue; tongueless.
agminal
Pertaining to an army marching, or to a train.
agnail
A corn on the toe or foot.
agora
An assembly; hence, the place of assembly, especially the market place, in an ancient Greek city.
agoing
In motion; in the act of going; as, to set a mill agoing.
agnoiology
The doctrine concerning those things of which we are necessarily ignorant.
agog
In eager desire; eager; astir.
agon
A contest for a prize at the public games.
agood
In earnest; heartily.
agree
In good part; kindly.
agouara
The crab-eating raccoon (Procyon cancrivorus), found in the tropical parts of America.
agraffe
A hook or clasp.
agrom
A disease occurring in Bengal and other parts of the East Indies, in which the tongue chaps and cleaves.
agricolist
A cultivator of the soil; an agriculturist.
agrypnotic
Anything which prevents sleep, or produces wakefulness, as strong tea or coffee.
alcaic
Pertaining to Alcaeus, a lyric poet of Mitylene, about 6000 b. c.
airless
Not open to a free current of air; wanting fresh air, or communication with the open air.
aidant
Helping; helpful; supplying aid.
ahold
Near the wind; as, to lay a ship ahold.
agynous
Without female organs; male.
aguilt
To be guilty of; to offend; to sin against; to wrong.
agush
In a gushing state.
ahead
In or to the front; in advance; onward.
ahem
An exclamation to call one's attention; hem.
ahull
With the sails furled, and the helm lashed alee; -- applied to ships in a storm. See Hull, n.
ahoy
A term used in hailing; as, "Ship ahoy."
ahriman
The Evil Principle or Being of the ancient Persians; the Prince of Darkness as opposer to Ormuzd, the King of Light.
ahungered
Pinched with hunger; very hungry.
ablins
Perhaps; possibly.
ailment
Indisposition; morbid affection of the body; -- not applied ordinarily to acute diseases.
aigremore
Charcoal prepared for making powder.
aider
One who, or that which, aids.
aidless
Helpless; without aid.
aiguille
A needle-shaped peak.
ailette
A small square shield, formerly worn on the shoulders of knights, -- being the prototype of the modern epaulet.
aimless
Without aim or purpose; as, an aimless life.
ailuroidea
A group of the Carnivora, which includes the cats, civets, and hyenas.
aimer
One who aims, directs, or points.
airer
One who exposes to the air.
airily
In an airy manner; lightly; gaily; jauntily; flippantly.
alack
An exclamation expressive of sorrow.
ajar
Slightly turned or opened; as, the door was standing ajar.
airy
Consisting of air; as, an airy substance; the airy parts of bodies.
airometer
A hollow cylinder to contain air. It is closed above and open below, and has its open end plunged into water.
airwards
Toward the air; upward.
aisle
Improperly used also for the have; -- as in the phrases, a church with three aisles, the middle aisle.
aitch
The letter h or H.
akin
Of the same kin; related by blood; -- used of persons; as, the two families are near akin.
ajutage
A tube through which water is discharged; an efflux tube; as, the ajutage of a fountain.
akimbo
With a crook or bend; with the hand on the hip and elbow turned outward.
aknow
Earlier form of Acknow.
alabaster
A compact variety or sulphate of lime, or gypsum, of fine texture, and usually white and translucent, but sometimes yellow, red, or gray.
alate
Lately; of late.
alamire
The lowest note but one in Guido Aretino's scale of music.
aladinist
One of a sect of freethinkers among the Mohammedans.
alilonghi
The tunny. See Albicore.
aland
On land; to the land; ashore.
alar
Pertaining to, or having, wings.
albicant
Growing or becoming white.
alban
A white crystalline resinous substance extracted from gutta-percha by the action of alcohol or ether.
albee
Although; albeit.
album
A white tablet on which anything was inscribed, as a list of names, etc.
albolith
A kind of plastic cement, or artificial stone, consisting chiefly of magnesia and silica; -- called also albolite.
albyn
Scotland; esp. the Highlands of Scotland.
alfenide
An alloy of nickel and silver electroplated with silver.
alegar
Sour ale; vinegar made of ale.
aller
Of all; -- used in composition; as, alderbest, best of all, alderwisest, wisest of all.
alco
A small South American dog, domesticated by the aborigines.
alcedo
A genus of perching birds, including the European kingfisher (Alcedo ispida). See Halcyon.
alchemical
Of or relating to alchemy.
alcyonacea
A group of soft-bodied Alcyonaria, of which Alcyonium is the type. See Illust. under Alcyonaria.
aldebaran
A red star of the first magnitude, situated in the eye of Taurus; the Bull's Eye. It is the bright star in the group called the Hyades.
alebench
A bench in or before an alehouse.
alderman
A senior or superior; a person of rank or dignity.
aleak
In a leaking condition.
alecithal
Applied to those ova which segment uniformly, and which have little or no food yelk embedded in their protoplasm.
alee
On or toward the lee, or the side away from the wind; the opposite of aweather. The helm of a ship is alee when pressed close to the lee side.
aleuronic
Having the nature of aleurone.
alength
At full length; lengthwise.
alehoof
Ground ivy (Nepeta Glechoma).
alemannic
Belonging to the Alemanni, a confederacy of warlike German tribes.
alepidote
Not having scales.
alert
Watchful; vigilant; active in vigilance.
alisanders
A name given to two species of the genus Smyrnium, formerly cultivated and used as celery now is; -- called also horse parsely.
alevin
Young fish; fry.
alewife
A woman who keeps an alehouse.
alexiteric
A preservative against contagious and infectious diseases, and the effects of poison in general.
alfalfa
The lucern (Medicago sativa); -- so called in California, Texas, etc.
alien
One excluded from certain privileges; one alienated or estranged; as, aliens from God's mercies.
algoid
Of the nature of, or resembling, an alga.
algal
Pertaining to, or like, algae.
alfilaria
The pin grass (Erodium cicutarium), a weed in California.
alfresco
In the open-air.
algebra
That branch of mathematics which treats of the relations and properties of quantity by means of letters and other symbols.
algidity
Chilliness; coldness
alias
At another time.
alguazil
An inferior officer of justice in Spain; a warrant officer; a constable.
alhambra
The palace of the Moorish kings at Granada.
alibility
Quality of being alible.
alicant
A kind of wine, formerly much esteemed; -- said to have been made near Alicant, in Spain.
alioth
A star in the tail of the Great Bear, the one next the bowl in the Dipper.
alike
Having resemblance or similitude; similar; without difference.
alife
On my life; dearly.
aligerous
Having wings; winged.
aliment
That which nourishes; food; nutriment; anything which feeds or adds to a substance in natural growth.
alinasal
Pertaining to expansions of the nasal bone or cartilage.
aliseptal
Relating to expansions of the nasal septum.
aliped
Wing-footed, as the bat.
aliquant
An aliquant part of a number or quantity is one which does not divide it without leaving a remainder; thus, 5 is an aliquant part of 16.
aliunde
From another source; from elsewhere; as, a case proved aliunde; evidence aliunde.
alitrunk
The segment of the body of an insect to which the wings are attached; the thorax.
alive
Having life, in opposition to dead; living; being in a state in which the organs perform their functions; as, an animal or a plant which is alive.
antoecians
Those who live under the same meridian, but on opposite parallels of latitude, north and south of the equator.
amomum
A genus of aromatic plants. It includes species which bear cardamoms, and grains of paradise.
altrical
Like the articles.
aloe
The wood of the agalloch.
allocate
To distribute or assign; to allot.
allfours
A game at cards, called "High, Low, Jack, and the Game."
alkoran
The Mohammedan Scriptures. Same as Alcoran and Koran.
alkahest
The fabled "universal solvent" of the alchemists; a menstruum capable of dissolving all bodies.
alkermes
A compound cordial, in the form of a confection, deriving its name from the kermes insect, its principal ingredient.
allah
The name of the Supreme Being, in use among the Arabs and the Mohammedans generally.
allecret
A kind of light armor used in the sixteenth century, esp. by the Swiss.
alineation
Alignment; position in a straight line, as of two planets with the sun.
allhallows
All the saints (in heaven).
alliable
Able to enter into alliance.
allision
The act of dashing against, or striking upon.
allness
Totality; completeness.
almightily
With almighty power.
ally
To connect or form a relation between by similitude, resemblance, friendship, or love.
allude
To compare allusively; to refer (something) as applicable.
allwork
Domestic or other work of all kinds; as, a maid of allwork, that is, a general servant.
almacantar
A recently invented instrument for observing the heavenly bodies as they cross a given almacantar circle.
almeh
An Egyptian dancing girl; an Alma.
almude
A measure for liquids in several countries. In Portugal the Lisbon almude is about 4.4, and the Oporto almude about 6.
almond
The fruit of the almond tree.
alms
Anything given gratuitously to relieve the poor, as money, food, or clothing; a gift of charity.
algum
A tree or wood of the Bible (2 Chron. ii. 8; 1 K. x. 11).
alnage
Measurement (of cloth) by the ell; also, a duty for such measurement.
alpha
The first letter in the Greek alphabet, answering to A, and hence used to denote the beginning.
aloof
At or from a distance, but within view, or at a small distance; apart; away.
aloin
A bitter purgative principle in aloes.
aloft
On high; in the air; high above the ground.
alogian
One of an ancient sect who rejected St. John's Gospel and the Apocalypse, which speak of Christ as the Logos.
alomancy
Divination by means of salt.
alone
Quite by one's self; apart from, or exclusive of, others; single; solitary; -- applied to a person or thing.
alow
Below; in a lower part.
alopecy
Loss of the hair; baldness.
alouatte
One of the several species of howling monkeys of South America. See Howler, 2.
alpaca
An animal of Peru (Lama paco), having long, fine, wooly hair, supposed by some to be a domesticated variety of the llama.
alpen
Of or pertaining to the Alps.
also
In like manner; likewise.
already
Prior to some specified time, either past, present, or future; by this time; previously.
alpigene
Growing in Alpine regions.
alquifou
A lead ore found in Cornwall, England, and used by potters to give a green glaze to their wares; potter's ore.
alsatian
Pertaining to Alsatia.
alsike
A species of clover with pinkish or white flowers; Trifolium hybridum.
althea
A genus of plants of the Mallow family. It includes the officinal marsh mallow, and the garden hollyhocks.
altaic
Of or pertaining to the Altai, a mountain chain in Central Asia.
alter
To make otherwise; to change in some respect, either partially or wholly; to vary; to modify.
altimeter
An instrument for taking altitudes, as a quadrant, sextant, etc.
altogether
All together; conjointly.
ambo
A large pulpit or reading desk, in the early Christian churches.
amandine
The vegetable casein of almonds.
alvine
Of, from, in, or pertaining to, the belly or the intestines; as, alvine discharges; alvine concretions.
alure
A walk or passage; -- applied to passages of various kinds.
alula
A false or bastard wing. See under Bastard.
alum
To steep in, or otherwise impregnate with, a solution of alum; to treat with alum.
alutaceous
Of a pale brown color; leather-yellow.
alveary
A beehive, or something resembling a beehive.
amadavat
The strawberry finch, a small Indian song bird (Estrelda amandava), commonly caged and kept for fighting.
always
At all times; ever; perpetually; throughout all time; continually; as, God is always the same.
alyssum
A genus of cruciferous plants; madwort. The sweet alyssum (A. maritimum), cultivated for bouquets, bears small, white, sweet-scented flowers.
amain
With might; with full force; vigorously; violently; exceedingly.
amalgam
An alloy of mercury with another metal or metals; as, an amalgam of tin, bismuth, etc.
ambages
A circuit; a winding. Hence: Circuitous way or proceeding; quibble; circumlocution; indirect mode of speech.
amate
To dismay; to dishearten; to daunt.
amaracus
A fragrant flower.
amass
To collect into a mass or heap; to gather a great quantity of; to accumulate; as, to amass a treasure or a fortune; to amass words or phrases.
amaurotic
Affected with amaurosis; having the characteristics of amaurosis.
amaze
To bewilder; to stupefy; to bring into a maze.
amber
A yellowish translucent resin resembling copal, found as a fossil in alluvial soils, with beds of lignite, or on the seashore in many places.
embassade
The mission of an ambassador.
ambassy
See Embassy, the usual spelling.
ambidexter
Using both hands with equal ease.
amble
To go at the easy gait called an amble; -- applied to the horse or to its rider.
amidin
Start modified by heat so as to become a transparent mass, like horn. It is soluble in cold water.
amerce
To punish, in general; to mulct.
amir
One of the Mohammedan nobility of Afghanistan and Scinde.
ambreate
A salt formed by the combination of ambreic acid with a base or positive radical.
ambulacral
Of or pertaining to ambulacra; avenuelike; as, the ambulacral ossicles, plates, spines, and suckers of echinoderms.
amelcorn
A variety of wheat from which starch is produced; -- called also French rice.
amen
An expression used at the end of prayers, and meaning, So be it. At the end of a creed, it is a solemn asseveration of belief.
amharic
Of or pertaining to Amhara, a division of Abyssinia; as, the Amharic language is closely allied to the Ethiopic.
amess
Amice, a hood or cape. See 2d Amice.
ametabola
A group of insects which do not undergo any metamorphosis.
amiability
The quality of being amiable; amiableness; sweetness of disposition.
amic
Related to, or derived, ammonia; -- used chiefly as a suffix; as, amic acid; phosphamic acid.
ammiral
An obsolete form of admiral.
amiss
Astray; faultily; improperly; wrongly; ill.
amine
One of a class of strongly basic substances derived from ammonia by replacement of one or more hydrogen atoms by a basic atom or radical.
amioid
Like or pertaining to the Amioidei.
amma
An abbes or spiritual mother.
ammeter
A contraction of amperometer or amperemeter.
amnesic
Of or pertaining to amnesia.
ammodyte
One of a genus of fishes; the sand eel.
ammunition
Military stores, or provisions of all kinds for attack or defense.
amoeba
A rhizopod. common in fresh water, capable of undergoing many changes of form at will. See Rhizopoda.
amnicolist
One who lives near a river.
amolition
Removal; a putting away.
anemogram
A record made by an anemograph.
anaemia
A morbid condition in which the blood is deficient in quality or in quantity.
amzel
The European ring ousel (Turdus torquatus).
ampelite
An earth abounding in pyrites, used by the ancients to kill insects, etc., on vines; -- applied by Brongniart to a carbonaceous alum schist.
amotion
Removal; ousting; especially, the removal of a corporate officer from his office.
amongst
Mixed or mingled; surrounded by.
amoret
An amorous girl or woman; a wanton.
amount
To go up; to ascend.
amove
To remove, as a person or thing, from a position.
ampulla
A narrow-necked vessel having two handles and bellying out like a jug.
amphibia
One of the classes of vertebrates.
ample
Large; great in size, extent, capacity, or bulk; spacious; roomy; widely extended.
ampyx
A woman's headband (sometimes of metal), for binding the front hair.
amrita
Immortality; also, the nectar conferring immortality.
amygdalate
Pertaining to, resembling, or made of, almonds.
amurcous
Full off dregs; foul.
amuck
In a frenzied and reckless manner.
amuletic
Of or pertaining to an amulet; operating as a charm.
amusable
Capable of being amused.
amyelous
Wanting the spinal cord.
anabaptism
The doctrine of the Anabaptists.
amyl
A hydrocarbon radical, C5H11, of the paraffine series found in amyl alcohol or fusel oil, etc.
amyous
Wanting in muscle; without flesh.
anacamptic
Reflecting of reflected; as, an anacamptic sound (and echo).
anadem
A garland or fillet; a chaplet or wreath.
anchor
Fig.: That which gives stability or security; that on which we place dependence for safety.
anapest
A metrical foot consisting of three syllables, the first two short, or unaccented, the last long, or accented (/ / -); the reverse of the dactyl.
anal
Pertaining to, or situated near, the anus; as, the anal fin or glands.
anaglyph
Any sculptured, chased, or embossed ornament worked in low relief, as a cameo.
anaks
A race of giants living in Palestine.
anamese
Of or pertaining to Anam, to southeastern Asia.
anan
An expression equivalent to What did you say? Sir? Eh?
anathema
A ban or curse pronounced with religious solemnity by ecclesiastical authority, and accompanied by excommunication.
anarch
The author of anarchy; one who excites revolt.
anas
A genus of water fowls, of the order Anseres, including certain species of fresh-water ducks.
ambury
A soft tumor or bloody wart on horses or oxen.
ancestor
One from whom a person is descended, whether on the father's or mother's side, at any distance of time; a progenitor; a fore father.
andean
Pertaining to the Andes.
ancient
Old; that has been of long duration; of long standing; of great age; as, an ancient forest; an ancient castle.
ankylosis
Stiffness or fixation of a joint; formation of a stiff joint.
anchylotic
Of or pertaining to anchylosis.
ancome
A small ulcerous swelling, coming suddenly; also, a whitlow.
andabatism
Doubt; uncertainty.
androus
A terminal combining form: Having a stamen or stamens; staminate; as, monandrous, with one stamen; polyandrous, with many stamens.
andine
Andean; as, Andine flora.
androecium
The stamens of a flower taken collectively.
anecdotage
Anecdotes collectively; a collection of anecdotes.
anear
To near; to approach.
anele
To give extreme unction to.
ankerite
A mineral closely related to dolomite, but containing iron.
angwantibo
A small lemuroid mammal (Arctocebus Calabarensis) of Africa. It has only a rudimentary tail.
angel
A spiritual, celestial being, superior to man in power and intelligence. In the Scriptures the angels appear as God's messengers.
anet
The herb dill, or dillseed.
anent
Over against; as, he lives anent the church.
aneroid
Containing no liquid; -- said of a kind of barometer.
aneurism
A soft, pulsating, hollow tumor, containing blood, arising from the preternatural dilation or rupture of the coats of an artery.
anew
Over again; another time; in a new form; afresh; as, to arm anew; to create anew.
angola
A fabric made from the wool of the Angora goat.
anginose
Pertaining to angina or angina pectoris.
angle
The inclosed space near the point where two lines meet; a corner; a nook.
angrily
In an angry manner; under the influence of anger.
anguine
Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a snake or serpent.
anientise
To frustrate; to bring to naught; to annihilate.
anhungered
Ahungered; longing.
anhelation
Short and rapid breathing; a panting; asthma.
anhima
A South American aquatic bird; the horned screamer or kamichi (Palamedea cornuta). See Kamichi.
anhydrous
Destitute of water; as, anhydrous salts or acids.
annicut
A dam or mole made in the course of a stream for the purpose of regulating the flow of a system of irrigation.
animadvert
To take notice; to observe; -- commonly followed by that.
anights
In the night time; at night.
anil
A West Indian plant (Indigofera anil), one of the original sources of indigo; also, the indigo dye.
anion
An electro-negative element, or the element which, in electro-chemical decompositions, is evolved at the anode; -- opposed to cation.
anise
An umbelliferous plant (Pimpinella anisum) growing naturally in Egypt, and cultivated in Spain, Malta, etc.
anon
Straightway; at once.
annodated
Curved somewhat in the form of the letter S.
annat
A half years's stipend, over and above what is owing for the incumbency, due to a minister's heirs after his decease.
ankle
The joint which connects the foot with the leg; the tarsus.
anlace
A broad dagger formerly worn at the girdle.
anneal
To heat, as glass, tiles, or earthenware, in order to fix the colors laid on them.
annihilate
To reduce to nothing or nonexistence; to destroy the existence of; to cause to cease to be.
anodon
A genus of fresh-water bivalves, having no teeth at the hinge.
annual
Of or pertaining to a year; returning every year; coming or happening once in the year; yearly.
anoa
A small wild ox of Celebes (Anoa depressicornis), allied to the buffalo, but having long nearly straight horns.
anoil
To anoint with oil.
anomal
Anything anomalous.
anserated
Having the extremities terminate in the heads of eagles, lions, etc.; as, an anserated cross.
anosmia
Loss of the sense of smell.
anophyte
A moss or mosslike plant which cellular stems, having usually an upward growth and distinct leaves.
anorexy
Want of appetite, without a loathing of food.
another
One more, in addition to a former number; a second or additional one, similar in likeness or in effect.
ansa
A name given to either of the projecting ends of Saturn's ring.
ante
Each player's stake, which is put into the pool before (ante) the game begins.
answer
To speak in defense against; to reply to in defense; as, to answer a charge; to answer an accusation.
anta
A species of pier produced by thickening a wall at its termination, treated architecturally as a pilaster, with capital and base.
anti
A prefix meaning against, opposite or opposed to, contrary, or in place of; -- used in composition in many English words.
anthem
A song or hymn of praise.
antler
The entire horn, or any branch of the horn, of a cervine animal, as of a stag.
arbor
A kind of latticework formed of, or covered with, vines, branches of trees, or other plants, for shade; a bower.
apocalypse
The revelation delivered to St. John, in the isle of Patmos, near the close of the first century, forming the last book of the New Testament.
apehood
The state of being an ape.
aonian
Pertaining to Aonia, in B/otia, or to the Muses, who were supposed to dwell there.
anxietude
The state of being anxious; anxiety.
anura
One of the orders of amphibians characterized by the absence of a tail, as the frogs and toads.
antral
Relating to an antrum.
anubis
An Egyptian deity, the conductor of departed spirits, represented by a human figure with the head of a dog or fox.
anus
The posterior opening of the alimentary canal, through which the excrements are expelled.
anvil
An iron block, usually with a steel face, upon which metals are hammered and shaped.
anyone
One taken at random rather than by selection; anybody. [Commonly written as two words.]
anybody
Any one out of an indefinite number of persons; anyone; any person.
anyhow
In any way or manner whatever; at any rate; in any event.
anything
Any object, act, state, event, or fact whatever; thing of any kind; something or other; aught; as, I would not do it for anything.
anyways
Anywise; at all.
apair
To impair or become impaired; to injure.
aoudad
An African sheeplike quadruped (the Ammotragus tragelaphus) having a long mane on the breast and fore legs.
aorist
A tense in the Greek language, which expresses an action as completed in past time, but leaves it, in other respects, wholly indeterminate.
aorta
The great artery which carries the blood from the heart to all parts of the body except the lungs; the main trunk of the arterial system.
apace
With a quick pace; quick; fast; speedily.
apagoge
An indirect argument which proves a thing by showing the impossibility or absurdity of the contrary.
apart
Separately, in regard to space or company; in a state of separation as to place; aside.
apalachian
See Appalachian.
apanthropy
An aversion to the company of men; a love of solitude.
apastron
That point in the orbit of a double star where the smaller star is farthest from its primary.
apathist
One who is destitute of feeling.
aphtha
One of the whitish specks called aphthae.
apex
The tip, top, point, or angular summit of anything; as, the apex of a mountain, spire, or cone; the apex, or tip, of a leaf.
apepsy
Defective digestion, indigestion.
apellous
Destitute of skin.
apennine
Of, pertaining to, or designating, the Apennines, a chain of mountains extending through Italy.
aperea
The wild Guinea pig of Brazil (Cavia aperea).
apetalous
Having no petals, or flower leaves. [See Illust. under Anther].
aphid
One of the genus Aphis; an aphidian.
aphakia
An anomalous state of refraction caused by the absence of the crystalline lens, as after operations for cataract.
aphelion
That point of a planet's or comet's orbit which is most distant from the sun, the opposite point being the perihelion.
aphony
Loss of voice or vocal utterance.
aphrite
See under Calcite.
apis
A genus of insects of the order Hymenoptera, including the common honeybee (Apis mellifica) and other related species.
apical
At or belonging to an apex, tip, or summit.
aphyllous
Destitute of leaves, as the broom rape, certain euphorbiaceous plants, etc.
apian
Belonging to bees.
apiece
Each by itself; by the single one; to each; as the share of each; as, these melons cost a shilling apiece.
apiol
An oily liquid derived from parsley.
aplomb
Assurance of manner or of action; self-possession.
apitpat
With quick beating or palpitation; pitapat.
aplacental
Belonging to the Aplacentata; without placenta.
apneumona
An order of holothurians in which the internal respiratory organs are wanting; -- called also Apoda or Apodes.
aplustre
An ornamental appendage of wood at the ship's stern, usually spreading like a fan and curved like a bird's feather.
apnoea
Partial privation or suspension of breath; suffocation.
apteran
One of the Aptera.
appair
To impair; to grow worse.
aporetical
Doubting; skeptical.
apohyal
Of or pertaining to a portion of the horn of the hyoid bone.
apodal
Without feet; footless.
apogamic
Relating to apogamy.
apolar
Having no radiating processes; -- applied particularly to certain nerve cells.
apopemptic
Sung or addressed to one departing; valedictory; as, apoplectic songs or hymns.
apophthegm
A short, pithy, and instructive saying; a terse remark, conveying some important truth; a sententious precept or maxim.
apositic
Destroying the appetite, or suspending hunger.
apotactite
One of a sect of ancient Christians, who, in supposed imitation of the first believers, renounced all their possessions.
apothem
The perpendicular from the center to one of the sides of a regular polygon.
apozem
A decoction or infusion.
appui
A support or supporter; a stay; a prop.
applaud
To show approval of by clapping the hands, acclamation, or other significant sign.
appeach
To impeach; to accuse; to asperse; to inform against; to reproach.
appian
Of or pertaining to Appius.
appoint
To fix with power or firmness; to establish; to mark out.
appraisal
A valuation by an authorized person; an appraisement.
apse
The bishop's seat or throne, in ancient churches.
apricate
To bask in the sun.
aprocta
A group of Turbellaria in which there is no anal aperture.
apsidal
Of or pertaining to the apsides of an orbit.
aptable
Capable of being adapted.
arab
One of a swarthy race occupying Arabia, and numerous in Syria, Northern Africa, etc.
apus
A genus of fresh-water phyllopod crustaceans. See Phyllopod.
aptness
Fitness; suitableness; appropriateness; as, the aptness of things to their end.
aptitude
A general fitness or suitableness; adaptation.
aptly
In an apt or suitable manner; fitly; properly; pertinently; appropriately; readily.
aptote
A noun which has no distinction of cases; an indeclinable noun.
aptychus
A shelly plate found in the terminal chambers of ammonite shells. Some authors consider them to be jaws; others, opercula.
aqueduct
A conductor, conduit, or artificial channel for conveying water, especially one for supplying large cities with water.
apyretic
Without fever; -- applied to days when there is an intermission of fever.
aqua
Water; -- a word much used in pharmacy and the old chemistry, in various signification, determined by the word or words annexed.
aquiferous
Consisting or conveying water or a watery fluid; as, aquiferous vessels; the aquiferous system.
aquose
Watery; aqueous.
arapaima
A large fresh-water food fish of South America.
aragonese
Of or pertaining to Aragon, in Spain, or to its inhabitants.
aracanese
Of or pertaining to Aracan, a province of British Burmah.
araeostyle
See Intercolumniation.
aramean
Of or pertaining to the Syrians and Chaldeans, or to their language; Aramaic.
araneidan
Of or pertaining to the Araneina or spiders.
araucaria
A genus of tall conifers of the pine family. The species are confined mostly to South America and Australia.
arara
The palm (or great black) cockatoo, of Australia (Microglossus aterrimus).
aration
Plowing; tillage.
arbiter
A person appointed, or chosen, by parties to determine a controversy between them.
arbalist
A crossbow, consisting of a steel bow set in a shaft of wood, furnished with a string and a trigger, and a mechanical device for bending the bow.
arblast
A crossbow. See Arbalest.
armor
Defensive arms for the body; any clothing or covering worn to protect one's person in battle.
argal
Crude tartar. See Argol.
ardor
Heat, in a literal sense; as, the ardor of the sun's rays.
arciform
Having the form of an arch; curved.
arcboutant
A flying buttress.
arbuscle
A dwarf tree, one in size between a shrub and a tree; a treelike shrub.
arcade
A long, arched building or gallery.
arch
Any part of a curved line.
archy
A suffix properly meaning a rule, ruling, as in monarchy, the rule of one only. Cf. -arch.
arcual
Of or pertaining to an arc.
arcograph
An instrument for drawing a circular arc without the use of a central point; a cyclograph.
arctation
Constriction or contraction of some natural passage, as in constipation from inflammation.
ardassine
A very fine sort of Persian silk.
ardency
Warmth of passion or affection; ardor; vehemence; eagerness; as, the ardency of love or zeal.
areek
In a reeking condition.
areed
To tell, declare, explain, or interpret; to divine; to guess; as, to aread a riddle or a dream.
arduous
Steep and lofty, in a literal sense; hard to climb.
area
Any plane surface, as of the floor of a room or church, or of the ground within an inclosure; an open space in a building.
areal
Of or pertaining to an area; as, areal interstices (the areas or spaces inclosed by the reticulate vessels of leaves).
areca
A genus of palms, one species of which produces the areca nut, or betel nut, which is chewed in India with the leaf of the Piper Betle and lime.
areola
The colored ring around the nipple, or around a vesicle or pustule.
arefaction
The act of drying, or the state of growing dry.
arena
Any place of public contest or exertion; any sphere of action; as, the arenaof debate; the arena of life.
arest
A support for the spear when couched for the attack.
aret
To reckon; to ascribe; to impute.
ariolation
A soothsaying; a foretelling.
aria
An air or song; a melody; a tune.
argo
The name of the ship which carried Jason and his fifty-four companions to Colchis, in quest of the Golden Fleece.
argean
Pertaining to the ship Argo. See Argo.
argil
Clay, or potter's earth; sometimes pure clay, or alumina. See Clay.
arguable
Capable of being argued; admitting of debate.
arhythmous
See Arrhizal, Arrhizous, Arrhythmic, Arrhythmous.
aries
The Ram; the first of the twelve signs in the zodiac, which the sun enters at the vernal equinox, about the 21st of March.
aricine
An alkaloid, first found in white cinchona bark.
arid
Exhausted of moisture; parched with heat; dry; barren.
aright
Rightly; correctly; in a right way or form; without mistake or crime; as, to worship God aright.
arillus
A exterior covering, forming a false coat or appendage to a seed, as the loose, transparent bag inclosing the seed or the white water lily.
armchair
A chair with arms to support the elbows or forearms.
arkite
Belonging to the ark.
arise
To proceed; to issue; to spring.
arithmancy
Divination by means of numbers.
arles
An earnest; earnest money; money paid to bind a bargain.
armada
A fleet of armed ships; a squadron. Specifically, the Spanish fleet which was sent to assail England, a.
armgaunt
With gaunt or slender legs. (?)
armed
Furnished with weapons of offense or defense; furnished with the means of security or protection.
armful
As much as the arm can hold.
armiferous
Bearing arms or weapons.
armhole
The cavity under the shoulder; the armpit.
armless
Without any arm or branch.
artemia
A genus of phyllopod Crustacea found in salt lakes and brines; the brine shrimp. See Brine shrimp.
around
In a circle; circularly; on every side; round.
arnee
The wild buffalo of India (Bos, or Bubalus, arni), larger than the domestic buffalo and having enormous horns.
arms
Instruments or weapons of offense or defense.
armpit
The hollow beneath the junction of the arm and shoulder; the axilla.
armrack
A frame, generally vertical, for holding small arms.
armure
A variety of twilled fabric ribbed on the surface.
army
A collection or body of men armed for war, esp. one organized in companies, battalions, regiments, brigades, and divisions, under proper officers.
aroma
The quality or principle of plants or other substances which constitutes their fragrance; agreeable odor; as, the aroma of coffee.
arnicin
An active principle of Arnica montana. It is a bitter resin.
aroideous
Belonging to, or resembling, the Arum family of plants.
aroph
A barbarous word used by the old chemists to designate various medical remedies.
arose
The past or preterit tense of Arise.
arrhizous
Destitute of a true root, as a parasitical plant.
arquated
Shaped like a bow; arcuate; curved.
arow
In a row, line, or rank; successively; in order.
arpeggio
The production of the tones of a chord in rapid succession, as in playing the harp, and not simultaneously; a strain thus played.
arraign
To call or set as a prisoner at the bar of a court to answer to the matter charged in an indictment or complaint.
arrear
To or in the rear; behind; backwards.
arse
The buttocks, or hind part of an animal; the posteriors; the fundament; the bottom.
arride
To please; to gratify.
arroba
A Spanish weight used in Mexico and South America = 25.36 lbs. avoir.; also, an old Portuguese weight, used in Brazil = 32.
arshine
A Russian measure of length = 2 ft. 4.246 inches.
arsine
A compound of arsenic and hydrogen, AsH3, a colorless and exceedingly poisonous gas, having an odor like garlic; arseniureted hydrogen.
aryan
The language of the original Aryans.
artsman
A man skilled in an art or in arts.
artiad
Even; not odd; -- said of elementary substances and of radicals the valence of which is divisible by two without a remainder.
artful
Performed with, or characterized by, art or skill.
arthritis
Any inflammation of the joints, particularly the gout.
artless
Wanting art, knowledge, or skill; ignorant; unskillful.
artotype
A kind of autotype.
aruspice
A soothsayer of ancient Rome. Same as Aruspex.
arum
A genus of plants found in central Europe and about the Mediterranean, having flowers on a spadix inclosed in a spathe.
arundelian
Pertaining to an Earl of Arundel; as, Arundel or Arundelian marbles, marbles from ancient Greece, bought by the Earl of Arundel in 1624.
arval
A funeral feast.
arvicole
A mouse of the genus Arvicola; the meadow mouse. There are many species.
asbolin
A peculiar acrid and bitter oil, obtained from wood soot.
asaphus
A genus of trilobites found in the Lower Silurian formation. See Illust. in Append.
arytenoid
Ladle-shaped; -- applied to two small cartilages of the larynx, and also to the glands, muscles, etc.
asafoetida
The fetid gum resin or inspissated juice of a large umbelliferous plant (Ferula asafoetida) of Persia and the East Indies.
asarabacca
An acrid herbaceous plant (Asarum Europaeum), the leaves and roots of which are emetic and cathartic.
asbestic
Of, pertaining to, or resembling asbestus; inconsumable; asbestine.
ascian
One of the Ascii.
ascend
To move upward; to mount; to go up; to rise; -- opposed to descend.
ascham
A sort of cupboard, or case, to contain bows and other implements of archery.
ascospore
One of the spores contained in the asci of lichens and fungi. [See Illust. of Ascus.]
asclepiad
A choriambic verse, first used by the Greek poet Asclepias, consisting of four feet, viz., a spondee, two choriambi, and an iambus.
ascribable
Capable of being ascribed; attributable.
bedside
The side of a bed.
azarole
The Neapolitan medlar (Crataegus azarolus), a shrub of southern Europe; also, its fruit.
aucupation
Birdcatching; fowling.
aswing
In a state of swinging.
asonant
Not sounding or sounded.
assinego
A stupid fellow.
ashler
Hewn or squared stone; also, masonry made of squared or hewn stone.
ashamed
Affected by shame; abashed or confused by guilt, or a conviction or consciousness of some wrong action or impropriety.
aseptic
Not liable to putrefaction; nonputrescent.
asexual
Having no distinct sex; without sexual action; as, asexual reproduction. See Fission and Gemmation.
ashen
Of or pertaining to the ash tree.
ashine
Shining; radiant.
asian
Of or pertaining to Asia; Asiatic.
ashtoreth
The principal female divinity of the Phoenicians, as Baal was the principal male divinity.
ashy
Pertaining to, or composed of, ashes; filled, or strewed with, ashes.
aside
On, or to, one side; out of a straight line, course, or direction; at a little distance from the rest; out of the way; apart.
asilus
A genus of large and voracious two-winged flies, including the bee killer and robber fly.
asking
The act of inquiring or requesting; a petition; solicitation.
asitia
Want of appetite; loathing of food.
asinine
Of or belonging to, or having the qualities of, the ass, as stupidity and obstinacy.
asiphonate
Destitute of a siphon or breathing tube; -- said of many bivalve shells.
askant
Sideways; obliquely; with a side glance; with disdain, envy, or suspicion.
asker
One who asks; a petitioner; an inquirer.
aslope
Slopingly; aslant; declining from an upright direction; sloping.
aslake
To mitigate; to moderate; to appease; to abate; to diminish.
asleep
In a state of sleep; in sleep; dormant.
asmonean
Of or pertaining to the patriotic Jewish family to which the Maccabees belonged; Maccabean; as, the Asmonean dynasty.
asomatous
Without a material body; incorporeal.
assyrian
Of or pertaining to Assyria, or to its inhabitants.
assegai
A spear used by tribes in South Africa as a missile and for stabbing, a kind of light javelin.
asphaltum
A composition of bitumen, pitch, lime, and gravel, used for forming pavements, and as a water-proof cement for bridges, roofs, etc.
aspalathus
A thorny shrub yielding a fragrant oil.
aspect
The act of looking; vision; gaze; glance.
aspic
The venomous asp.
asquint
With the eye directed to one side; not in the straight line of vision; obliquely; awry, so as to see distortedly; as, to look asquint.
assibilate
To make sibilant; to change to a sibilant.
assai
A direction equivalent to very; as, adagio assai, very slow.
asse
A small foxlike animal (Vulpes cama) of South Africa, valued for its fur.
assober
To make or keep sober.
assuage
To abate or subside.
astraddle
In a straddling position; astride; bestriding; as, to sit astraddle a horse.
astheny
Want or loss of strength; debility; diminution of the vital forces.
astacus
A genus of crustaceans, containing the crawfish of fresh-water lobster of Europe, and allied species of western North America.
asteism
Genteel irony; a polite and ingenious manner of deriding another.
astigmatic
Affected with, or pertaining to, astigmatism; as, astigmatic eyes; also, remedying astigmatism; as, astigmatic lenses.
astomous
Not possessing a mouth.
asunder
Apart; separate from each other; into parts; in two; separately; into or in different pieces or places.
astucious
Subtle; cunning; astute.
astylar
Without columns or pilasters.
asura
An enemy of the gods, esp. one of a race of demons and giants.
aswail
The sloth bear (Melursus labiatus) of India.
atokous
Producing only asexual individuals, as the eggs of certain annelids.
atazir
The influence of a star upon other stars or upon men.
atacamite
An oxychloride of copper, usually in emerald-green prismatic crystals.
asynartete
Disconnected; not fitted or adjusted.
asylum
Any place of retreat and security.
asymmetral
Incommensurable; also, unsymmetrical.
asystole
A weakening or cessation of the contractile power of the heart.
atabal
A kettledrum; a kind of tabor, used by the Moors.
ataunto
Fully rigged, as a vessel; with all sails set; set on end or set right.
ataman
A hetman, or chief of the Cossacks.
ataraxy
Perfect peace of mind, or calmness.
atavic
Pertaining to a remote ancestor, or to atavism.
ataxy
Disorder; irregularity.
athlete
One who contended for a prize in the public games of ancient Greece or Rome.
athalamous
Not furnished with shields or beds for the spores, as the thallus of certain lichens.
atechnic
Without technical or artistic knowledge.
ateles
A genus of American monkeys with prehensile tails, and having the thumb wanting or rudimentary. See Spider monkey, and Coaita.
athecata
A division of Hydroidea in which the zooids are naked, or not inclosed in a capsule. See Tubularian.
athink
To repent; to displease; to disgust.
atimy
Public disgrace or stigma; infamy; loss of civil rights.
athwart
Across; from side to side of.
atilt
In the manner of a tilter; in the position, or with the action, of one making a thrust.
atlanta
A genus of small glassy heteropod mollusks found swimming at the surface in mid ocean. See Heteropod.
atmologist
One who is versed in atmology.
attic
A low story above the main order or orders of a facade, in the classical styles; -- a term introduced in the 17th century.
atrede
To surpass in council.
atonable
Admitting an atonement; capable of being atoned for; expiable.
atoll
A coral island or islands, consisting of a belt of coral reef, partly submerged, surrounding a central lagoon or depression; a lagoon island.
atom
An ultimate indivisible particle of matter.
atop
On or at the top.
atrabiliar
Melancholy; atrabilious.
atrypa
A extinct genus of Branchiopoda, very common in Silurian limestones.
atrial
Of or pertaining to an atrium.
atrocha
A kind of chaetopod larva in which no circles of cilia are developed.
attacca
Attack at once; -- a direction at the end of a movement to show that the next is to follow immediately, without any pause.
attemper
To reduce, modify, or moderate, by mixture; to temper; to regulate, as temperature.
atwirl
Twisted; distorted; awry.
attract
To draw to, or cause to tend to; esp. to cause to approach, adhere, or combine; or to cause to resist divulsion, separation, or decomposition.
attle
Rubbish or refuse consisting of broken rock containing little or no ore.
attollent
Lifting up; raising; as, an attollent muscle.
attune
To tune or put in tune; to make melodious; to adjust, as one sound or musical instrument to another; as, to attune the voice to a harp.
atwain
In twain; asunder.
aubade
An open air concert in the morning, as distinguished from an evening serenade; also, a pianoforte composition suggestive of morning.
atwo
In two; in twain; asunder.
atypical
That has no type; devoid of typical character; irregular; unlike the type.
auchenium
The part of the neck nearest the back.
aubin
A broken gait of a horse, between an amble and a gallop; -- commonly called a Canterbury gallop.
auctary
That which is superadded; augmentation.
avocate
To call off or away; to withdraw; to transfer to another tribunal.
auspicate
To foreshow; to foretoken.
aulic
Pertaining to a royal court.
augitic
Pertaining to, or like, augite; containing augite as a principal constituent; as, augitic rocks.
augean
Of or pertaining to Augeus, king of Elis, whose stable contained 3000 oxen, and had not been cleaned for 30 years.
audacious
Daring; spirited; adventurous.
audibility
The quality of being audible; power of being heard; audible capacity.
aucht
Property; possession.
aught
Anything; any part.
aularian
Relating to a hall.
augment
To add an augment to.
augur
One who foretells events by omens; a soothsayer; a diviner; a prophet.
auld
Old; as, Auld Reekie (old smoky), i. e., Edinburgh.
auletic
Of or pertaining to a pipe (flute) or piper.
aunt
The sister of one's father or mother; -- correlative to nephew or niece. Also applied to an uncle's wife.
aumery
A form of Ambry, a closet; but confused with Almonry, as if a place for alms.
auln
An ell. [Obs.] See Aune.
aumail
To figure or variegate.
auncel
A rude balance for weighing, and a kind of weight, formerly used in England.
aune
A French cloth measure, of different parts of the country (at Paris, 0.95 of an English ell); -- now superseded by the meter.
auric
Of or pertaining to gold.
aural
Of or pertaining to the air, or to an aura.
aurelia
The chrysalis, or pupa of an insect, esp. when reflecting a brilliant golden color, as that of some of the butterflies.
aurora
The rising light of the morning; the dawn of day; the redness of the sky just before the sun rises.
auscultate
To practice auscultation; to examine by auscultation.
avast
Cease; stop; stay.
auxesis
A figure by which a grave and magnificent word is put for the proper word; amplification; hyperbole.
authentic
Of approved authority; true; trustworthy; credible; as, an authentic writer; an authentic portrait; authentic information.
austere
Sour and astringent; rough to the state; having acerbity; as, an austere crab apple; austere wine.
autarchy
Self-sufficiency.
autochthon
That which is original to a particular country, or which had there its origin.
autumn
The harvest or fruits of autumn.
avalanche
A large mass or body of snow and ice sliding swiftly down a mountain side, or falling down a precipice.
auxiliary
Conferring aid or help; helping; aiding; assisting; subsidiary; as auxiliary troops.
avail
To turn to the advantage of; to be of service to; to profit; to benefit; to help; as, artifices will not avail the sinner in the day of judgment.
avant
The front of an army. [Obs.] See Van.
avarice
An excessive or inordinate desire of gain; greediness after wealth; covetousness; cupidity.
aves
The class of Vertebrata that includes the birds.
avellane
In the form of four unhusked filberts; as, an avellane cross.
avatar
The descent of a deity to earth, and his incarnation as a man or an animal; -- chiefly associated with the incarnations of Vishnu.
avaunce
To advance; to profit.
avena
A genus of grasses, including the common oat (Avena sativa); the oat grasses.
aver
A work horse, or working ox.
avid
Longing eagerly for; eager; greedy.
avian
Of or instrument to birds.
avicular
Of or pertaining to a bird or to birds.
avile
To abase or debase; to vilify; to depreciate.
avifauna
The birds, or all the kinds of birds, inhabiting a region.
avis
Advice; opinion; deliberation.
awless
Wanting reverence; void of respectful fear.
awanting
Missing; wanting.
avow
To declare openly, as something believed to be right; to own or acknowledge frankly; as, a man avows his principles or his crimes.
avoke
To call from or back again.
avoset
A grallatorial bird, of the genus Recurvirostra; the scooper. The bill is long and bend upward toward the tip.
avoid
To emit or throw out; to void; as, to avoid excretions.
avolate
To fly away; to escape; to exhale.
avouch
To appeal to; to cite or claim as authority.
avuncular
Of or pertaining to an uncle.
avoyer
A chief magistrate of a free imperial city or canton of Switzerland.
avulse
To pluck or pull off.
await
To watch for; to look out for.
awake
To rouse from sleep; to wake; to awaken.
awful
Oppressing with fear or horror; appalling; terrible; as, an awful scene.
aweather
On the weather side, or toward the wind; in the direction from which the wind blows; -- opposed to alee; as, helm aweather!
award
To determine; to make an award.
away
From a place; hence.
aweigh
Just drawn out of the ground, and hanging perpendicularly; atrip; -- said of the anchor.
awesome
Causing awe; appalling; awful; as, an awesome sight.
awing
On the wing; flying; fluttering.
awhape
To confound; to terrify; to amaze.
awhile
For a while; for some time; for a short time.
awkly
In an unlucky (left-handed) or perverse manner.
awkward
Not easily managed or effected; embarrassing.
axis
The spotted deer (Cervus axis or Axis maculata) of India, where it is called hog deer and parrah (Moorish name).
awork
At work; in action.
awning
A rooflike cover, usually of canvas, extended over or before any place as a shelter from the sun, rain, or wind.
awlwort
A plant (Subularia aquatica), with awl-shaped leaves.
awned
Furnished with an awn, or long bristle-shaped tip; bearded.
awnless
Without awns or beard.
awny
Having awns; bearded.
axial
Of or pertaining to an axis; of the nature of, or resembling, an axis; around an axis.
awreke
To avenge. [Obs.] See Wreak.
awry
Aside from the line of truth, or right reason; unreasonable or unreasonably; perverse or perversely.
axil
The angle or point of divergence between the upper side of a branch, leaf, or petiole, and the stem or branch from which it springs.
axinite
A borosilicate of alumina, iron, and lime, commonly found in glassy, brown crystals with acute edges.
axtree
Axle or axletree.
axminster
An Axminster carpet, an imitation Turkey carpet, noted for its thick and soft pile; -- so called from Axminster, Eng.
axle
The pin or spindle on which a wheel revolves, or which revolves with a wheel.
axman
One who wields an ax.
axolotl
An amphibian of the salamander tribe found in the elevated lakes of Mexico; the siredon.
axstone
A variety of jade. It is used by some savages, particularly the natives of the South Sea Islands, for making axes or hatchets.
ayegreen
The houseleek (Sempervivum tectorum).
axunge
Fat; grease; esp. the fat of pigs or geese; usually (Pharm.), lard prepared for medical use.
ayah
A native nurse for children; also, a lady's maid.
ayme
The utterance of the ejaculation "Ay me !" [Obs.] See Ay, interj.
ayeins
Again; back against.
ayrshire
One of a superior breed of cattle from Ayrshire, Scotland. Ayrshires are notable for the quantity and quality of their milk.
barkbound
Prevented from growing, by having the bark too firm or close.
baigne
To soak or drench.
bachelor
A man of any age who has not been married.
baaing
The bleating of a sheep.
azorian
Of or pertaining to the Azores.
azobenzene
A substance (C6H5.N2.C6H5) derived from nitrobenzene, forming orange red crystals which are easily fusible.
azedarach
A handsome Asiatic tree (Melia azedarach), common in the southern United States; -- called also, Pride of India, Pride of China, and Bead tree.
azimuth
The quadrant of an azimuth circle.
azoleic
Pertaining to an acid produced by treating oleic with nitric acid.
azonic
Confined to no zone or region; not local.
azure
Sky-blue; resembling the clear blue color of the unclouded sky; cerulean; also, cloudless.
azoth
The first principle of metals, i. e., mercury, which was formerly supposed to exist in all metals, and to be extractable from them.
aztec
Of or relating to one of the early races in Mexico that inhabited the great plateau of that country at the time of the Spanish conquest in 1519.
azygous
Odd; having no fellow; not one of a pair; single; as, the azygous muscle of the uvula.
azyme
Unleavened bread.
bablah
The ring of the fruit of several East Indian species of acacia; neb-neb. It contains gallic acid and tannin, and is used for dyeing drab.
babbitt
To line with Babbitt metal.
baal
The supreme male divinity of the Phoenician and Canaanitish nations.
baba
A kind of plum cake.
babe
An infant; a young child of either sex; a baby.
babillard
The lesser whitethroat of Europe; -- called also babbling warbler.
baby
An infant or young child of either sex; a babe.
babu
A Hindoo gentleman; a native clerk who writes English; also, a Hindoo title answering to Mr.  or Esquire.
baboonery
Baboonish behavior.
baccarat
A French game of cards, played by a banker and punters.
backarack
A kind of wine made at Bacharach on the Rhine.
badness
The state of being bad.
badder
Compar. of Bad, a.
bacon
The back and sides of a pig salted and smoked; formerly, the flesh of a pig salted or fresh.
bacillar
Shaped like a rod or staff.
back
A ferryboat.  See Bac, 1.
bacterial
Of or pertaining to bacteria.
baculine
Of or pertaining to the rod or punishment with the rod.
badiaga
A fresh-water sponge (Spongilla), common in the north of Europe, the powder of which is used to take away the livid marks of bruises.
bade
A form of the pat tense of Bid.
badge
A distinctive mark, token, sign, or cognizance, worn on the person; as, the badge of a society; the badge of a policeman.
badly
In a bad manner; poorly; not well; unskillfully; imperfectly; unfortunately; grievously; so as to cause harm; disagreeably; seriously.
badminton
A game, similar to lawn tennis, played with shuttlecocks.
bagman
A commercial traveler; one employed to solicit orders for manufacturers and tradesmen.
bafta
A coarse stuff, usually of cotton, originally made in India. Also, an imitation of this fabric made for export.
baenomere
One of the somites (arthromeres) that make up the thorax of Arthropods.
baff
A blow; a stroke.
bagasse
Sugar cane, as it comes crushed from the mill. It is then dried and used as fuel. Also extended to the refuse of beetroot sugar.
baggage
The clothes, tents, utensils, and provisions of an army.
bagreef
The lower reef of fore and aft sails; also, the upper reef of topsails.
bagnio
A house for bathing, sweating, etc.; -- also, in Turkey, a prison for slaves.
bagpipe
A musical wind instrument, now used chiefly in the Highlands of Scotland.
bagwig
A wig, in use in the 18th century, with the hair at the back of the head in a bag.
bague
The annular molding or group of moldings dividing a long shaft or clustered column into two or more parts.
bahar
A weight used in certain parts of the East Indies, varying considerably in different localities, the range being from 223 to 625 pounds.
banal
Commonplace; trivial; hackneyed; trite.
balconied
Having balconies.
baize
A coarse woolen stuff with a long nap; -- usually dyed in plain colors.
bairam
The name of two Mohammedan festivals, of which one is held at the close of the fast called Ramadan, and the other seventy days after the fast.
bail
A bucket or scoop used in bailing water out of a boat.
bain
A bath; a bagnio.
baisemains
Respects; compliments.
bait
Any substance, esp. food, used in catching fish, or other animals, by alluring them to a hook, snare, inclosure, or net.
baking
The act or process of cooking in an oven, or of drying and hardening by heat or cold.
bajocco
A small copper coin formerly current in the Roman States, worth about a cent and a half.
bake
To prepare, as food, by cooking in a dry heat, either in an oven or under coals, or on heated stone or metal; as, to bake bread, meat, apples.
balaam
A paragraph describing something wonderful, used to fill out a newspaper column; -- an allusion to the miracle of Balaam's ass speaking.
balbuties
The defect of stammering; also, a kind of incomplete pronunciation.
balm
An aromatic plant of the genus Melissa.
balisaur
A badgerlike animal of India (Arcionyx collaris).
bald
Destitute of the natural or common covering on the head or top, as of hair, feathers, foliage, trees, etc.
bale
A bundle or package of goods in a cloth cover, and corded for storage or transportation; also, a bundle of straw / hay, etc.
balk
A ridge of land left unplowed between furrows, or at the end of a field; a piece missed by the plow slipping aside.
ball
Any round or roundish body or mass; a sphere or globe; as, a ball of twine; a ball of snow.
balter
To stick together.
balneal
Of or pertaining to a bath.
balsa
A raft or float, used principally on the Pacific coast of South America.
baluster
A small column or pilaster, used as a support to the rail of an open parapet, to guard the side of a staircase, or the front of a gallery.
bambino
A child or baby; esp., a representation in art of the infant Christ wrapped in swaddling clothes.
banxring
An East Indian insectivorous mammal of the genus Tupaia.
bank
A steep acclivity, as the slope of a hill, or the side of a ravine.
bane
That which destroys life, esp. poison of a deadly quality.
banco
A bank, especially that of Venice.
band
A continuous tablet, stripe, or series of ornaments, as of carved foliage, of color, or of brickwork, etc.
bang
To beat, as with a club or cudgel; to treat with violence; to handle roughly.
banian
A Hindoo trader, merchant, cashier, or money changer.
banquet
A feast; a sumptuous entertainment of eating and drinking; often, a complimentary or ceremonious feast, followed by speeches.
banlieue
The territory without the walls, but within the legal limits, of a town or city.
banner
A kind of flag attached to a spear or pike by a crosspiece, and used by a chief as his standard in battle.
banstickle
A small fish, the three-spined stickleback.
bantam
A variety of small barnyard fowl, with feathered legs, probably brought from Bantam, a district of Java.
bare
Without clothes or covering; stripped of the usual covering; naked; as, his body is bare; the trees are bare.
baptismal
Pertaining to baptism; as, baptismal vows.
baobab
A gigantic African tree (Adansonia digitata), also naturalized in India. See Adansonia.
baphomet
An idol or symbolical figure which the Templars were accused of using in their mysterious rites.
barb
Beard, or that which resembles it, or grows in the place of it.
barcarolle
A popular song or melody sung by Venetian gondoliers.
baric
Of or pertaining to barium; as, baric oxide.
barful
Full of obstructions.
bargain
An agreement or stipulation; mutual pledge.
bark
To strip the bark from; to peel.
bard
The exterior covering of the trunk and branches of a tree; the rind.
barque
A three-masted vessel, having her foremast and mainmast square-rigged, and her mizzenmast schooner-rigged.
bawson
A large, unwieldy person.
basyle
A positive or nonacid constituent of compound, either elementary, or, if compound, performing the functions of an element.
baritone
Grave and deep, as a kind of male voice.
barpost
A post sunk in the ground to receive the bars closing a passage into a field.
balmy
Full of barm or froth; in a ferment.
barley
A valuable grain, of the family of grasses, genus Hordeum, used for food, and for making malt, from which are prepared beer, ale, and whisky.
barm
Foam rising upon beer, or other malt liquors, when fermenting, and used as leaven in making bread and in brewing; yeast.
barn
To lay up in a barn.
barograph
An instrument for recording automatically the variations of atmospheric pressure.
barter
The act or practice of trafficking by exchange of commodities; an exchange of goods.
barracan
A thick, strong stuff, somewhat like camlet; -- still used for outer garments in the Levant.
barse
The common perch. See 1st Bass.
barway
A passage into a field or yard, closed by bars made to take out of the posts.
baryphony
Difficulty of speech.
bash
To abash; to disconcert or be disconcerted or put out of countenance.
basbleu
A bluestocking; a literary woman.
barytum
The metal barium. See Barium.
basal
Relating to, or forming, the base.
bascinet
A light helmet, at first open, but later made with a visor.
base
Of little, or less than the usual, height; of low growth; as, base shrubs.
basque
Pertaining to Biscay, its people, or their language.
basic
Relating to a base; performing the office of a base in a salt.
bask
To lie in warmth; to be exposed to genial heat.
bass
An edible, spiny-finned fish, esp. of the genera Roccus, Labrax, and related genera. There are many species.
bast
The inner fibrous bark of various plants; esp. of the lime tree; hence, matting, cordage, etc., made therefrom.
batwing
Shaped like a bat's wing; as, a bat's-wing burner.
bating
With the exception of; excepting.
bate
Strife; contention.
batardeau
A wall built across the ditch of a fortification, with a sluice gate to regulate the height of water in the ditch on both sides of the wall.
batch
The quantity of bread baked at one time.
batfowler
One who practices or finds sport in batfowling.
bath
The act of exposing the body, or part of the body, for purposes of cleanliness, comfort, health, etc.
batoidei
The division of fishes which includes the rays and skates.
batlet
A short bat for beating clothes in washing them; -- called also batler, batling staff, batting staff.
batman
A man who has charge of a bathorse and his load.
batrachia
The order of amphibians which includes the frogs and toads; the Anura. Sometimes the word is used in a wider sense as equivalent to Amphibia.
batsman
The one who wields the bat in cricket, baseball, etc.
bavarian
Of or pertaining to Bavaria.
batz
A small copper coin, with a mixture of silver, formerly current in some parts of Germany and Switzerland.
batta
Extra pay; esp. an extra allowance to an English officer serving in India.
batule
A springboard in a circus or gymnasium; -- called also batule board.
bauble
A trifling piece of finery; a gewgaw; that which is gay and showy without real value; a cheap, showy plaything.
baudrick
A belt. See Baldric.
bawcock
A fine fellow; -- a term of endearment.
bavin
A fagot of brushwood, or other light combustible matter, for kindling fires; refuse of brushwood.
bawble
A trinket. See Bauble.
bawl
To cry out with a loud, full sound; to cry with vehemence, as in calling or exultation; to shout; to vociferate.
bawd
To procure women for lewd purposes.
bawn
An inclosure with mud or stone walls, for keeping cattle; a fortified inclosure.
beat
To punish by blows; to thrash.
bedesman
A poor man, supported in a beadhouse, and required to pray for the soul of its founder; an almsman.
bazar
In the East, an exchange, marketplace, or assemblage of shops where goods are exposed for sale.
bayberry
The fruit of the bay tree or Laurus nobilis.
baxter
A baker; originally, a female baker.
baya
The East Indian weaver bird (Ploceus Philippinus).
bayed
Having a bay or bays.
bayonet
A pin which plays in and out of holes made to receive it, and which thus serves to engage or disengage parts of the machinery.
bead
Any small globular body
bdellium
A gum resin of reddish brown color, brought from India, Persia, and Africa.
beach
Pebbles, collectively; shingle.
bedehouse
An almshouse for poor people who pray daily for their benefactors.
beading
Molding in imitation of beads.
beal
To gather matter; to swell and come to a head, as a pimple.
beadwork
Ornamental work in beads.
beadsnake
A small poisonous snake of North America (Elaps fulvius), banded with yellow, red, and black.
bedeswoman
Fem. of Beadsman.
beagle
A small hound, or hunting dog, twelve to fifteen inches high, used in hunting hares and other small game.
beak
A similar bill in other animals, as the turtles.
bear
To support or sustain; to hold up.
beam
Any large piece of timber or iron long in proportion to its thickness, and prepared for use.
bean
A name given to the seed of certain leguminous herbs, chiefly of the genera Faba, Phaseolus, and Dolichos; also, to the herbs.
bearable
Capable of being borne or endured; tolerable.
beast
Any living creature; an animal; -- including man, insects, etc.
bedbug
A wingless, bloodsucking, hemipterous insect (Cimex Lectularius), sometimes infesting houses and especially beds.
beck
A vat. See Back.
bebleed
To make bloody; to stain with blood.
beau
A man who takes great care to dress in the latest fashion; a dandy.
beaver
An amphibious rodent, of the genus Castor.
becalm
To render calm or quiet; to calm; to still; to appease.
bechamel
A rich, white sauce, prepared with butter and cream.
becripple
To make a cripple of; to cripple; to lame.
beclap
To catch; to grasp; to insnare.
become
To come; to get.
becuna
A fish of the Mediterranean (Sphyraena spet). See Barracuda.
bedabble
To dabble; to sprinkle or wet.
bedkey
An instrument for tightening the parts of a bedstead.
bede
To pray; also, to offer; to proffer.
bedchair
A chair with adjustable back, for the sick, to support them while sitting up in bed.
bedded
Provided with a bed; as, double-bedded room; placed or arranged in a bed or beds.
bedfellow
One who lies with another in the same bed; a person who shares one's couch.
bedight
To bedeck; to array or equip; to adorn.
bedote
To cause to dote; to deceive.
bedlam
A place appropriated to the confinement and care of the insane; a madhouse.
bedmaker
One who makes beds.
bedquilt
A quilt for a bed; a coverlet.
bedpan
A pan for warming beds.
bedrabble
To befoul with rain and mud; to drabble.
bimedial
Applied to a line which is the sum of two lines commensurable only in power (as the side and diagonal of a square).
beshine
To shine upon; to illumine.
bell
A hollow perforated sphere of metal containing a loose ball which causes it to sound when moved.
begin
To have or commence an independent or first existence; to take rise; to commence.
beeswax
The wax secreted by bees, and of which their cells are constructed.
beef
An animal of the genus Bos, especially the common species, B. taurus, including the bull, cow, and ox, in their full grown state; esp.
bedwarf
To make a dwarf of; to stunt or hinder the growth of; to dwarf.
bedtick
A tick or bag made of cloth, used for inclosing the materials of a bed.
beduck
To duck; to put the head under water; to immerse.
bedye
To dye or stain.
beech
A tree of the genus Fagus.
beemaster
One who keeps bees.
beehive
A hive for a swarm of bees. Also used figuratively.
beelzebub
The title of a heathen deity to whom the Jews ascribed the sovereignty of the evil spirits; hence, the Devil or a devil.
been
The past participle of Be. In old authors it is also the pr. tense plural of Be. See 1st Bee.
beer
A fermented liquor made from any malted grain, but commonly from barley malt, with hops or some other substance to impart a bitter flavor.
beflatter
To flatter excessively.
beeve
A beef; a beef creature.
beet
A biennial plant of the genus Beta, which produces an edible root the first year and seed the second year.
beetle
A heavy mallet, used to drive wedges, beat pavements, etc.
befall
To come to pass; to happen.
befit
To be suitable to; to suit; to become.
befuddle
To becloud and confuse, as with liquor.
befog
To involve in a fog; -- mostly as a participle or part. adj.
befriend
To act as a friend to; to favor; to aid, benefit, or countenance.
begem
To adorn with gems, or as with gems.
beggable
Capable of being begged.
beild
A place of shelter; protection; refuge.
behalf
Advantage; favor; stead; benefit; interest; profit; support; defense; vindication.
begod
To exalt to the dignity of a god; to deify.
beglerbeg
The governor of a province of the Ottoman empire, next in dignity to the grand vizier.
begnaw
To gnaw; to eat away; to corrode.
begrave
To bury; also, to engrave.
beguile
To delude by guile, artifice, or craft; to deceive or impose on, as by a false statement; to lure.
behest
That which is willed or ordered; a command; a mandate; an injunction.
behead
To sever the head from; to take off the head of.
behn
The Centaurea behen, or saw-leaved centaury.
behight
To promise; to vow.
behold
To have in sight; to see clearly; to look at; to regard with the eyes.
belabor
To ply diligently; to work carefully upon.
bejewel
To ornament with a jewel or with jewels; to spangle.
being
Existence, as opposed to nonexistence; state or sphere of existence.
bejade
To jade or tire.
bejumble
To jumble together.
beknow
To confess; to acknowledge.
beleaguer
To surround with an army so as to preclude escape; to besiege; to blockade.
belch
To eject or throw up from the stomach with violence; to eruct.
beldame
Grandmother; -- corresponding to belsire.
belgard
A sweet or loving look.
belfry
A movable tower erected by besiegers for purposes of attack and defense.
belial
An evil spirit; a wicked and unprincipled person; the personification of evil.
bepelt
To pelt roundly.
bename
To promise; to name.
belzebuth
A spider monkey (Ateles belzebuth) of Brazil.
belt
That which engirdles a person or thing; a band or girdle; as, a lady's belt; a sword belt.
belock
To lock, or fasten as with a lock.
belsire
A grandfather, or ancestor.
beluga
A cetacean allied to the dolphins.
belvedere
A small building, or a part of a building, more or less open, constructed in a place commanding a fine prospect.
bemingle
To mingle; to mix.
bema
A platform from which speakers addressed an assembly.
bemean
To make mean; to lower.
bemoan
To express deep grief for by moaning; to express sorrow for; to lament; to bewail; to pity or sympathize with.
bemuddle
To muddle; to stupefy or bewilder; to confuse.
benjamin
A kind of upper coat for men.
beneath
Lower in place, with something directly over or on; under; underneath; hence, at the foot of.
bench
A long seat, differing from a stool in its greater length.
bend
To turn toward some certain point; to direct; to incline.
bengal
A province in India, giving its name to various stuffs, animals, etc.
benight
To involve in darkness; to shroud with the shades of night; to obscure.
benumb
To make torpid; to deprive of sensation or sensibility; to stupefy; as, a hand or foot benumbed by cold.
benne
The name of two plants (Sesamum orientale and S. indicum), originally Asiatic; -- also called oil plant.
bent
Imp. & p. p. of Bend.
benzal
A compound radical, C6H5.CH, of the aromatic series, related to benzyl and benzoyl; -- used adjectively or in combination.
bepaint
To paint; to cover or color with, or as with, paint.
berhyme
To mention in rhyme or verse; to rhyme about.
bequeath
To give or leave by will; to give by testament; -- said especially of personal property.
bepommel
To pommel; to beat, as with a stick; figuratively, to assail or criticise in conversation, or in writing.
bepinch
To pinch, or mark with pinches.
beplaster
To plaster over; to cover or smear thickly; to bedaub.
bepraise
To praise greatly or extravagantly.
bepuffed
Puffed; praised.
berdash
A kind of neckcloth.
berain
To rain upon; to wet with rain.
berbe
An African genet (Genetta pardina). See Genet.
bere
See Bear, barley.
berg
A large mass or hill, as of ice.
berried
Furnished with berries; consisting of a berry; baccate; as, a berried shrub.
berme
A narrow shelf or path between the bottom of a parapet and the ditch.
berkeleian
Of or relating to Bishop Berkeley or his system of idealism; as, Berkeleian philosophy.
berlin
A four-wheeled carriage, having a sheltered seat behind the body and separate from it, invented in the 17th century, at Berlin.
bernardine
Of or pertaining to St. Bernard of Clairvaux, or to the Cistercian monks.
berob
To rob; to plunder.
berycoid
Of or pertaining to the Berycidae, a family of marine fishes.
berserker
One of a class of legendary heroes, who fought frenzied by intoxicating liquors, and naked, regardless of wounds.
berth
Convenient sea room.
bescatter
To scatter over.
besayle
A great-grandfather.
besee
To see; to look; to mind.
bicched
Pecked; pitted; notched.
beweep
To weep over; to deplore; to bedew with tears.
betide
To happen to; to befall; to come to ; as, woe betide the wanderer.
bespangle
To adorn with spangles; to dot or sprinkle with something brilliant or glittering.
besmear
To smear with any viscous, glutinous matter; to bedaub; to soil.
beside
At the side of; on one side of.
beslaver
To defile with slaver; to beslobber.
besnow
To scatter like snow; to cover thick, as with snow flakes.
besogne
A worthless fellow; a bezonian.
betake
To take or seize.
best
Most advanced; most correct or complete; as, the best scholar; the best view of a subject.
beswike
To lure; to cheat.
bete
To better; to mend. See Beete.
bethel
A place of worship; a hallowed spot.
between
In the space which separates; betwixt; as, New York is between Boston and Philadelphia.
betso
A small brass Venetian coin.
betoken
To signify by some visible object; to show by signs or tokens.
betrap
To draw into, or catch in, a trap; to insnare; to circumvent.
better
Having good qualities in a greater degree than another; as, a better man; a better physician; a better house; a better air.
betumble
To throw into disorder; to tumble.
bevile
A chief broken or opening like a carpenter's bevel.
beurre
A beurre (or buttery) pear, one with the meat soft and melting; -- used with a distinguishing word; as, Beurre d'Anjou; Beurre Clairgeau.
bevel
Having the slant of a bevel; slanting.
bevy
A company; an assembly or collection of persons, especially of ladies.
bewail
To express deep sorrow for, as by wailing; to lament; to wail over.
bhunder
An Indian monkey (Macacus Rhesus), protected by the Hindoos as sacred. See Rhesus.
beyond
On the further side of; in the same direction as, and further on or away than.
bewonder
To fill with wonder.
bewhore
To corrupt with regard to chastity; to make a whore of.
bewig
To cover (the head) with a wig.
bewrap
To wrap up; to cover.
beylic
The territory ruled by a bey.
bezique
A game at cards in which various combinations of cards in the hand, when declared, score points.
bezant
A circle in or, i. e., gold, representing the gold coin called bezant.
bezel
The rim which encompasses and fastens a jewel or other object, as the crystal of a watch, in the cavity in which it is set.
bezoardic
Pertaining to, or compounded with, bezoar.
bezzle
To plunder; to waste in riot.
bibacious
Addicted to drinking.
bias
A weight on the side of the ball used in the game of bowls, or a tendency imparted to the ball, which turns it from a straight line.
biacid
Having two hydrogen atoms which can be replaced by negative atoms or radicals to form salts; -- said of bases.
biangular
Having two angles or corners.
biaxial
Having two axes; as, biaxial polarization.
bibbe
To drink; to tipple.
bibitory
Of or pertaining to drinking or tippling.
bibb
A bibcock. See Bib, n., 3.
bibcock
A cock or faucet having a bent down nozzle.
bibulous
Readily imbibing fluids or moisture; spongy; as, bibulous blotting paper.
bible
A book containing the sacred writings belonging to any religion; as, the Koran is often called the Mohammedan Bible.
bicallous
Having two callosities or hard spots.
bifronted
Having two fronts.
bide
To dwell; to inhabit; to abide; to stay.
biconcave
Concave on both sides; as, biconcave vertebrae.
bichir
A remarkable ganoid fish (Polypterus bichir) found in the Nile and other African rivers. See Brachioganoidei.
bise
A pale blue pigment, prepared from the native blue carbonate of copper, or from smalt; -- called also blue bice.
biceps
A muscle having two heads or origins; -- applied particularly to a flexor in the arm, and to another in the thigh.
bicipital
Having two heads or origins, as a muscle.
bicker
A small wooden vessel made of staves and hoops, like a tub.
bicycle
A light vehicle having two wheels one behind the other. It has a saddle seat and is propelled by the rider's feet acting on cranks or levers.
bicrenate
Twice crenated, as in the case of leaves whose crenatures are themselves crenate.
bicuspid
One of the two double-pointed teeth which intervene between the canines (cuspids) and the molars, on each side of each jaw.
bidale
An invitation of friends to drink ale at some poor man's house, and there to contribute in charity for his relief.
biddable
Obedient; docile.
bifacial
Having the opposite surfaces alike.
biennial
Happening, or taking place, once in two years; as, a biennial election.
bidigitate
Having two fingers or fingerlike projections.
bield
A shelter. Same as Beild.
bier
A handbarrow or portable frame on which a corpse is placed or borne to the grave.
beestings
The first milk given by a cow after calving.
bifid
Cleft to the middle or slightly beyond the middle; opening with a cleft; divided by a linear sinus, with straight margins.
biferous
Bearing fruit twice a year.
biffin
A sort of apple peculiar to Norfolk, Eng.
biflorous
Bearing two flowers; two-flowered.
bifold
Twofold; double; of two kinds, degrees, etc.
bike
A nest of wild bees, wasps, or ants; a swarm.
bigly
In a tumid, swelling, blustering manner; haughtily; violently.
bigeminate
Having a forked petiole, and a pair of leaflets at the end of each division; biconjugate; twice paired; -- said of a decompound leaf.
bifurcated
Two-pronged; forked.
biga
A two-horse chariot.
bigg
See Big, n. & v.
bigha
A measure of land in India, varying from a third of an acre to an acre.
bigwig
A person of consequence; as, the bigwigs of society.
bigness
The state or quality of being big; largeness; size; bulk.
bigot
A hypocrite; esp., a superstitious hypocrite.
bijou
A trinket; a jewel; -- a word applied to anything small and of elegant workmanship.
bijugate
Having two pairs, as of leaflets.
bilge
The protuberant part of a cask, which is usually in the middle.
bilberry
The European whortleberry (Vaccinium myrtillus); also, its edible bluish black fruit.
bikh
The East Indian name of a virulent poison extracted from Aconitum ferox or other species of aconite: also, the plant itself.
bilabiate
Having two lips, as the corols of certain flowers.
bilcock
The European water rail.
bile
Bitterness of feeling; choler; anger; ill humor; as, to stir one's bile.
bill
A beak, as of a bird, or sometimes of a turtle or other animal.
biliary
Relating or belonging to bile; conveying bile; as, biliary acids; biliary ducts.
bilk
A thwarting an adversary in cribbage by spoiling his score; a balk.
biltong
Lean meat cut into strips and sun-dried.
bilobate
Divided into two lobes or segments.
bimaculate
Having, or marked with, two spots.
bloat
To inflate; to puff up; to make vain.
bite
To puncture, abrade, or sting with an organ (of some insects) used in taking food.
bipunctate
Having two punctures, or spots.
biogeny
Life development generally.
bing
A heap or pile; as, a bing of wood.
binal
Twofold; double.
bimonthly
Occurring, done, or coming, once in two months; as, bimonthly visits; bimonthly publications.
bimuscular
Having two adductor muscles, as a bivalve mollusk.
bind
To tie, or confine with a cord, band, ligature, chain, etc.; to fetter; to make fast; as, to bind grain in bundles; to bind a prisoner.
bine
The winding or twining stem of a hop vine or other climbing plant.
binturong
A small Asiatic civet of the genus Arctilis.
binnacle
A case or box placed near the helmsman, containing the compass of a ship, and a light to show it at night.
binocular
Having two eyes.
binucleate
Having two nuclei; as, binucleate cells.
biocellate
Having two ocelli (eyelike spots); -- said of a wing, etc.
biotaxy
The classification of living organisms according to their structural character; taxonomy.
bioplasmic
Pertaining to, or consisting of, bioplasm.
biological
Of or relating to biology.
biometry
Measurement of life; calculation of the probable duration of human life.
biorgan
A physiological organ; a living organ; an organ endowed with function; -- distinguished from idorgan.
biostatics
The physical phenomena of organized bodies, in opposition to their organic or vital phenomena.
bipinnaria
The larva of certain starfishes as developed in the free-swimming stage.
bipalmate
Palmately branched, with the branches again palmated.
biped
A two-footed animal, as man.
biplicate
Twice folded together.
bipolar
Doubly polar; having two poles; as, a bipolar cell or corpuscle.
biscayan
Of or pertaining to Biscay in Spain.
birk
A small European minnow (Leuciscus phoxinus).
birch
The wood or timber of the birch.
biquadrate
The fourth power, or the square of the square. Thus 4x4=16, the square of 4, and 16x16=256, the biquadrate of 4.
biradiated
Having two rays; as, a biradiate fin.
bird
Orig., a chicken; the young of a fowl; a young eaglet; a nestling; and hence, a feathered flying animal (see 2).
bireme
An ancient galley or vessel with two banks or tiers of oars.
birse
A bristle or bristles.
birl
To revolve or cause to revolve; to spin.
birr
To make, or move with, a whirring noise, as of wheels in motion.
birt
A fish of the turbot kind; the brill.
bisaccate
Having two little bags, sacs, or pouches.
bispinose
Having two spines.
bisk
Soup or broth made by boiling several sorts of flesh together.
bishop
A spiritual overseer, superintendent, or director.
bisie
To busy; to employ.
bismer
A rule steelyard.
bison
The aurochs or European bison.
bistre
A dark brown pigment extracted from the soot of wood.
bisque
Unglazed white porcelain.
bissextile
Leap year; every fourth year, in which a day is added to the month of February on account of the excess of the tropical year (365 d.
bitake
To commend; to commit.
bisulcate
Having two grooves or furrows.
bitch
The female of the canine kind, as of the dog, wolf, and fox.
blare
To sound loudly and somewhat harshly.
biweekly
Occurring or appearing once every two weeks; fortnightly.
bitumed
Smeared with bitumen.
bitless
Not having a bit or bridle.
bitheism
Belief in the existence of two gods; dualism.
biting
That bites; sharp; cutting; sarcastic; caustic.
bitstock
A stock or handle for holding and rotating a bit; a brace.
bitt
To put round the bitts; as, to bitt the cable, in order to fasten it or to slacken it gradually, which is called veering away.
bivector
A term made up of the two parts / + /1 /-1, where / and /1  are vectors.
biuret
A white, crystalline, nitrogenous substance, C2O2N3H5, formed by heating urea. It is intermediate between urea and cyanuric acid.
bivalency
The quality of being bivalent.
bivial
Of or relating to the bivium.
bivouac
The watch of a whole army by night, when in danger of surprise or attack.
bladder
Any vesicle or blister, especially if filled with air, or a thin, watery fluid.
bizet
The upper faceted portion of a brilliant-cut diamond, which projects from the setting and occupies the zone between the girdle and the table.
biwreye
To bewray; to reveal.
bizarre
Odd in manner or appearance; fantastic; whimsical; extravagant; grotesque.
blab
To utter or tell unnecessarily, or in a thoughtless manner; to publish (secrets or trifles) without reserve or discretion.
black
In a less literal sense: Enveloped or shrouded in darkness; very dark or gloomy; as, a black night; the heavens black with clouds.
blain
An inflammatory swelling or sore; a bulla, pustule, or blister.
blae
Dark blue or bluish gray; lead-colored.
blague
Mendacious boasting; falsehood; humbug.
blamable
Deserving of censure; faulty; culpable; reprehensible; censurable; blameworthy.
blancard
A kind of linen cloth made in Normandy, the thread of which is partly blanches before it is woven.
blench
To shrink; to start back; to draw back, from lack of courage or resolution; to flinch; to quail.
blea
The part of a tree which lies immediately under the bark; the alburnum or sapwood.
blaubok
The blue buck. See Blue buck, under Blue.
blase
Having the sensibilities deadened by excess or frequency of enjoyment; sated or surfeited with pleasure; used up.
blat
To cry, as a calf or sheep; to bleat; to make a senseless noise; to talk inconsiderately.
blay
A fish. See Bleak, n.
blaze
A stream of gas or vapor emitting light and heat in the process of combustion; a bright flame.
bled
Imp. & p. p. of Bleed.
bleb
A large vesicle or bulla, usually containing a serous fluid; a blister; a bubble, as in water, glass, etc.
blek
To blacken; also, to defile.
blee
Complexion; color; hue; likeness; form.
blemish
To mark with deformity; to injure or impair, as anything which is well formed, or excellent; to mar, or make defective, either the body or mind.
blimbing
See Bilimbi, etc.
bleyme
An inflammation in the foot of a horse, between the sole and the bone.
blesbok
A South African antelope (Alcelaphus albifrons), having a large white spot on the forehead.
blet
A form of decay in fruit which is overripe.
blickey
A tin dinner pail.
blight
To affect with blight; to blast; to prevent the growth and fertility of.
bliss
Orig., blithesomeness; gladness; now, the highest degree of happiness; blessedness; exalted felicity; heavenly joy.
blin
To stop; to cease; to desist.
blirt
A gust of wind and rain.
blive
Quickly; forthwith.
blite
A genus of herbs (Blitum) with a fleshy calyx. Blitum capitatum is the strawberry blite.
blizzard
A gale of piercingly cold wind, usually accompanied with fine and blinding snow; a furious blast.
bogtrotter
One who lives in a boggy country; -- applied in derision to the lowest class of Irish.
bobber
One who, or that which, bobs.
bludgeon
A short stick, with one end loaded, or thicker and heavier that the other, used as an offensive weapon.
blore
The act of blowing; a roaring wind; a blast.
bloedite
A hydrous sulphate of magnesium and sodium.
blob
Something blunt and round; a small drop or lump of something viscid or thick; a drop; a bubble; a blister.
blocage
The roughest and cheapest sort of rubblework, in masonry.
blonket
Gray; bluish gray.
blood
Relationship by descent from a common ancestor; consanguinity; kinship.
blow
To flower; to blossom; to bloom.
blossom
A blooming period or stage of development; something lovely that gives rich promise.
blot
To spot, stain, or bespatter, as with ink.
blub
To swell; to puff out, as with weeping.
blucher
A kind of half boot, named from the Prussian general Blucher.
blush
To become suffused with red in the cheeks, as from a sense of shame, modesty, or confusion; to become red from such cause, as the cheeks or face.
bluing
The act of rendering blue; as, the bluing of steel.
blue
Having the color of the clear sky, or a hue resembling it, whether lighter or darker; as, the deep, blue sea; as blue as a sapphire; blue violets.
bluff
Having a broad, flattened front; as, the bluff bows of a ship.
blunder
To make a gross error or mistake; as, to blunder in writing or preparing a medical prescription.
blur
To cause imperfection of vision in; to dim; to darken.
boast
To speak in exulting language of another; to glory; to exult.
boanerges
Any declamatory and vociferous preacher or orator.
boar
The uncastrated male of swine; specifically, the wild hog.
boat
A small open vessel, or water craft, usually moved by cars or paddles, but often by a sail.
bobac
The Poland marmot (Arctomys bobac).
bodkin
An implement of steel, bone, ivory, etc., with a sharp point, for making holes by piercing; a /tiletto; an eyeleteer.
bocca
The round hole in the furnace of a glass manufactory through which the fused glass is taken out.
bobtail
An animal (as a horse or dog) with a short tail.
bobfly
The fly at the end of the leader; an end fly.
bobsleigh
A short sled, mostly used as one of a pair connected by a reach or coupling; also, the compound sled so formed.
bobwhite
The common quail of North America (Colinus, or Ortyx, Virginianus); -- so called from its note.
bocal
A cylindrical glass vessel, with a large and short neck.
bode
To indicate by signs, as future events; to be the omen of; to portend to presage; to foreshow.
boce
A European fish (Box vulgaris), having a compressed body and bright colors; -- called also box, and bogue.
bockelet
A kind of long-winged hawk; -- called also bockerel, and bockeret.
bodge
A botch; a patch.
bodian
A large food fish (Diagramma lineatum), native of the East Indies.
boes
Behoves or behooves.
body
The material organized substance of an animal, whether living or dead, as distinguished from the spirit, or vital principle; the physical person.
bodle
A small Scotch coin worth about one sixth of an English penny.
bodock
The Osage orange.
boeotian
Of or pertaining to Boeotia; hence, stupid; dull; obtuse.
boer
A colonist or farmer in South Africa of Dutch descent.
boggle
To do anything awkwardly or unskillfully.
bogberry
The small cranberry (Vaccinium oxycoccus), which grows in boggy places.
bogey
A goblin; a bugbear. See Bogy.
bogle
A goblin; a specter; a frightful phantom; a bogy; a bugbear.
bogie
A four-wheeled truck, having a certain amount of play around a vertical axis, used to support in part a locomotive on a railway track.
bogsucker
The American woodcock; -- so called from its feeding among the bogs.
bonce
A boy's game played with large marbles.
boletic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, the Boletus.
boisterous
Rough or rude; unbending; unyielding; strong; powerful.
bogy
A specter; a hobgoblin; a bugbear.
bogue
To fall off from the wind; to edge away to leeward; -- said only of inferior craft.
bogwood
The wood of trees, esp. of oaks, dug up from peat bogs. It is of a shining black or ebony color, and is largely used for making ornaments.
bohea
Bohea tea, an inferior kind of black tea. See under Tea.
boil
To be agitated like boiling water, by any other cause than heat; to bubble; to effervesce; as, the boiling waves.
bold
Forward to meet danger; venturesome; daring; not timorous or shrinking from risk; brave; courageous.
boke
To poke; to thrust.
bolar
Of or pertaining to bole or clay; partaking of the nature and qualities of bole; clayey.
bole
The trunk or stem of a tree, or that which is like it.
bolete
Any fungus of the family Boletaceae.
bolster
A long pillow or cushion, used to support the head of a person lying on a bed; -- generally laid under the pillows.
boln
To swell; to puff.
bolide
A kind of bright meteor; a bolis.
boll
The pod or capsule of a plant, as of flax or cotton; a pericarp of a globular form.
bollen
Swollen; puffed out.
bologna
A city of Italy which has given its name to various objects.
bomb
A great noise; a hollow sound.
bolt
Lightning; a thunderbolt.
bolus
A rounded mass of anything, esp. a large pill.
bonair
Gentle; courteous; complaisant; yielding.
bonbon
Sugar confectionery; a sugarplum; hence, any dainty.
bony
Consisting of bone, or of bones; full of bones; pertaining to bones.
boniform
Sensitive or responsive to moral excellence.
bonfire
A large fire built in the open air, as an expression of public joy and exultation, or for amusement.
bond
That which binds, ties, fastens, or confines, or by which anything is fastened or bound, as a cord, chain, etc.
bone
One of the pieces or parts of an animal skeleton; as, a rib or a thigh bone; a bone of the arm or leg; also, any fragment of bony substance.
bongrace
A projecting bonnet or shade to protect the complexion; also, a wide-brimmed hat.
bonhommie
Good nature; pleasant and easy manner.
bonspiel
A cur/ing match between clubs.
bonmot
A witty repartee; a jest.
bonne
A female servant charged with the care of a young child.
bontebok
The pied antelope of South Africa (Alcelaphus pygarga). Its face and rump are white. Called also nunni.
bonus
A premium given for a loan, or for a charter or other privilege granted to a company; as the bank paid a bonus for its charter.
bockland
Charter land held by deed under certain rents and free services, which differed in nothing from free socage lands.
boodle
The whole collection or lot; caboodle.
bonze
A Buddhist or Fohist priest, monk, or nun.
booby
A dunce; a stupid fellow.
boohoe
To bawl; to cry loudly.
book
A composition, written or printed; a treatise.
boon
A prayer or petition.
bookless
Without books; unlearned.
boom
A long pole or spar, run out for the purpose of extending the bottom of a particular sail; as, the jib boom, the studding-sail boom, etc.
boose
A stall or a crib for an ox, cow, or other animal.
boor
A husbandman; a peasant; a rustic; esp. a clownish or unrefined countryman.
boot
Remedy; relief; amends; reparation; hence, one who brings relief.
cope
A covering for the head.
catlike
Like a cat; stealthily; noiselessly.
bureau
Originally, a desk or writing table with drawers for papers.
bregma
The point of junction of the coronal and sagittal sutures of the skull.
bowge
To swell out. See Bouge.
both
The one and the other; the two; the pair, without exception of either.
boscage
A growth of trees or shrubs; underwood; a thicket; thick foliage; a wooded landscape.
born
Brought forth, as an animal; brought into life; introduced by birth.
bord
A board; a table.
borable
Capable of being bored.
borborygm
A rumbling or gurgling noise produced by wind in the bowels.
bore
To form or enlarge by means of a boring instrument or apparatus; as, to bore a steam cylinder or a gun barrel; to bore a hole.
boric
Of, pertaining to, or containing, boron.
borsholder
The head or chief of a tithing, or borough (see 2d Borough); the headborough; a parish constable.
borough
The collective body of citizens or inhabitants of a borough; as, the borough voted to lay a tax.
borrel
Coarse woolen cloth; hence, coarse clothing; a garment.
bort
Imperfectly crystallized or coarse diamonds, or fragments made in cutting good diamonds which are reduced to powder and used in lapidary work.
bosa
A drink, used in the East. See Boza.
bosporian
Of or pertaining to the Thracian or the Cimmerian Bosporus.
bosquet
A grove; a thicket; shrubbery; an inclosure formed by branches of trees, regularly or irregularly disposed.
bosh
Figure; outline; show.
bosk
A thicket; a small wood.
boskiness
Boscage; also, the state or quality of being bosky.
bosom
The breast of a human being; the part, between the arms, to which anything is pressed when embraced by them.
botanical
Of or pertaining to botany; relating to the study of plants; as, a botanical system, arrangement, textbook, expedition.
boss
Any protuberant part; a round, swelling part or body; a knoblike process; as, a boss of wood.
boswellian
Relating to, or characteristic of, Boswell, the biographer of Dr. Johnson.
botch
A swelling on the skin; a large ulcerous affection; a boil; an eruptive disease.
bote
Compensation; amends; satisfaction; expiation; as, man bote, a compensation or a man slain.
buolt
Corrupted form Bolt.
bouch
An allowance of meat and drink for the tables of inferior officers or servants in a nobleman's palace or at court.
botryogen
A hydrous sulphate of iron of a deep red color. It often occurs in botryoidal form.
boothy
A wooden hut or humble cot, esp. a rude hut or barrack for unmarried farm servants; a shepherd's or hunter's hut; a booth.
botocudos
A Brazilian tribe of Indians, noted for their use of poisons; -- also called Aymbores.
bottine
A small boot; a lady's boot.
botuliform
Having the shape of a sausage.
bouge
To stave in; to bilge.
boud
A weevil; a worm that breeds in malt, biscuit, etc.
bouffe
Comic opera. See Opera Bouffe.
bouilli
Boiled or stewed meat; beef boiled with vegetables in water from which its gravy is to be made; beef from which bouillon or soup has been made.
boul
A curved handle.
bout
As much of an action as is performed at one time; a going and returning, as of workmen in reaping, mowing, etc.
bouquet
A nosegay; a bunch of flowers.
boultin
One of the shafts of a clustered column.
boun
Ready; prepared; destined; tending.
bour
A chamber or a cottage.
bouse
To drink immoderately; to carouse; to booze. See Booze.
bowbell
One born within hearing distance of Bow-bells; a cockney.
bovid
Relating to that tribe of ruminant mammals of which the genus Bos is the type.
bowable
Capable of being bowed or bent; flexible; easily influenced; yielding.
bowel
One of the intestines of an animal; an entrail, especially of man; a gut; -- generally used in the plural.
bowfin
A voracious ganoid fish (Amia calva) found in the fresh waters of the United States; the mudfish; -- called also Johnny Grindle, and dogfish.
boyish
Resembling a boy in a manners or opinions; belonging to a boy; childish; trifling; puerile.
boxberry
The wintergreen. (Gaultheria procumbens).
bowldery
Characterized by bowlders.
bowknot
A knot in which a portion of the string is drawn through in the form of a loop or bow, so as to be readily untied.
bowhead
The great Arctic or Greenland whale. (Balaena mysticetus). See Baleen, and Whale.
bowing
The act or art of managing the bow in playing on stringed instruments.
bowl
A concave vessel of various forms (often approximately hemispherical), to hold liquids, etc.
boulder
A large stone, worn smooth or rounded by the action of water; a large pebble.
bowse
To carouse; to bouse; to booze.
bowman
A man who uses a bow; an archer.
bowne
To make ready; to prepare; to dress.
bowwow
An onomatopoetic name for a dog or its bark.
bowyer
An archer; one who uses bow.
boxwood
The wood of the box (Buxus).
boxing
The act of inclosing (anything) in a box, as for storage or transportation.
boxen
Made of boxwood; pertaining to, or resembling, the box (Buxus).
boxhaul
To put (a vessel) on the other tack by veering her short round on her heel; -- so called from the circumstance of bracing the head yards abox (i.
boxkeeper
An attendant at a theater who has charge of the boxes.
boxthorn
A plant of the genus Lycium, esp. Lycium barbarum.
boydekin
A dagger; a bodkin.
boyard
A member of a Russian aristocratic order abolished by Peter the Great. Also, one of a privileged class in Roumania.
boycott
The process, fact, or pressure of boycotting; a combining to withhold or prevent dealing or social intercourse with a tradesman, employer, etc.
boyer
A Flemish sloop with a castle at each end.
boyhood
The state of being a boy; the time during which one is a boy.
brazier
An artificer who works in brass.
brahminism
The religion or system of doctrines of the Brahmans; the religion of Brahma.
brae
A hillside; a slope; a bank; a hill.
brabantine
Pertaining to Brabant, an ancient province of the Netherlands.
braccate
Furnished with feathers which conceal the feet.
brag
A boast or boasting; bragging; ostentatious pretense or self glorification.
brahma
A valuable variety of large, domestic fowl, peculiar in having the comb divided lengthwise into three parts, and the legs well feathered.
bramble
Any plant of the genus Rubus, including the raspberry and blackberry. Hence: Any rough, prickly shrub.
braid
To weave, interlace, or entwine together, as three or more strands or threads; to form into a braid; to plait.
brake
A fern of the genus Pteris, esp. the P. aquilina, common in almost all countries. It has solitary stems dividing into three principal branches.
bran
The European carrion crow.
brash
Hasty in temper; impetuous.
braxy
A disease of sheep. The term is variously applied in different localities.
braunite
A native oxide of manganese, of dark brownish black color. It was named from a Mr. Braun of Gotha.
brass
An alloy (usually yellow) of copper and zinc, in variable proportion, but often containing two parts of copper to one part of zinc.
brat
A coarse garment or cloak; also, coarse clothing, in general.
bravado
Boastful and threatening behavior; a boastful menace.
brawl
To quarrel noisily and outrageously.
breach
The act of breaking, in a figurative sense.
bray
To pound, beat, rub, or grind small or fine.
braze
To solder with hard solder, esp. with an alloy of copper and zinc; as, to braze the seams of a copper pipe.
bred
Imp. & p. p. of Breed.
brecciated
Consisting of angular fragments cemented together; resembling breccia in appearance.
breech
The lower part of the body behind; the buttocks.
buansuah
The wild dog of northern India (Cuon primaevus), supposed by some to be an ancestral species of the domestic dog.
briticism
A word, phrase, or idiom peculiar to Great Britain; any manner of using a word or words that is peculiar to Great Britain.
bridal
Of or pertaining to a bride, or to wedding; nuptial; as, bridal ornaments; a bridal outfit; a bridal chamber.
breton
Of or relating to Brittany, or Bretagne, in France.
brennage
A tribute which tenants paid to their lord, in lieu of bran, which they were obliged to furnish for his hounds.
brehon
An ancient Irish or Scotch judge.
breme
Fierce; sharp; severe; cruel.
brant
Smooth; unwrinkled.
brent
A brant. See Brant.
briarean
Pertaining to, or resembling, Briareus, a giant fabled to have a hundred hands; hence, hundred-handed or many-handed.
breve
A note or character of time, equivalent to two semibreves or four minims. When dotted, it is equal to three semibreves.
brew
To boil or seethe; to cook.
bribable
Capable of being bribed.
brick
Bricks, collectively, as designating that kind of material; as, a load of brick; a thousand of brick.
brill
A fish allied to the turbot (Rhombus levis), much esteemed in England for food; -- called also bret, pearl, prill.
briered
Set with briers.
brief
Short in duration.
briar
A plant with a slender woody stem bearing stout prickles; especially, species of Rosa, Rubus, and Smilax.
brig
A two-masted, square-rigged vessel.
brike
A breach; ruin; downfall; peril.
brisk
Full of liveliness and activity; characterized by quickness of motion or action; lively; spirited; quick.
brim
The rim, border, or upper edge of a cup, dish, or any hollow vessel used for holding anything.
brin
One of the radiating sticks of a fan. The outermost are larger and longer, and are called panaches.
britt
The young of the common herring; also, a small species of herring; the sprat.
bright
To be or become overripe, as wheat, barley, or hops.
brose
Pottage made by pouring some boiling liquid on meal (esp. oatmeal), and stirring it. It is called beef brose, water brose, etc.
brog
A pointed instrument, as a joiner's awl, a brad awl, a needle, or a small sharp stick.
brob
A peculiar brad-shaped spike, to be driven alongside the end of an abutting timber to prevent its slipping.
brize
The breeze fly. See Breeze.
broach
An awl; a bodkin; also, a wooden rod or pin, sharpened at each end, used by thatchers.
brocaded
Woven or worked, as brocade, with gold and silver, or with raised flowers, etc.
brodekin
A buskin or half-boot.
broma
A light form of prepared cocoa (or cacao), or the drink made from it.
broiderer
One who embroiders.
broke
To transact business for another.
bronchia
The bronchial tubes which arise from the branching of the trachea, esp. the subdivision of the bronchi.
brooch
An ornament, in various forms, with a tongue, pin, or loop for attaching it to a garment; now worn at the breast by women; a breastpin.
bruh
The rhesus monkey. See Rhesus.
brow
The prominent ridge over the eye, with the hair that covers it, forming an arch above the orbit.
broth
Liquid in which flesh (and sometimes other substances, as barley or rice) has been boiled; thin or simple soup.
brouded
Braided; broidered.
bruang
The Malayan sun bear.
brucine
A powerful vegetable alkaloid, found, associated with strychnine, in the seeds of different species of Strychnos, especially in the Nux vomica.
brunette
A girl or woman with a somewhat brown or dark complexion.
bruin
A bear; -- so called in popular tales and fables.
brumaire
The second month of the calendar adopted by the first French republic. It began thirty days after the autumnal equinox.
brutal
Of or pertaining to a brute; as, brutal nature.
brush
The bushy tail of a fox.
bryologist
One versed in bryology.
bulb
A name given to some parts that resemble in shape certain bulbous roots; as, the bulb of the aorta.
budgerow
A large and commodious, but generally cumbrous and sluggish boat, used for journeys on the Ganges.
bucentaur
A fabulous monster, half ox, half man.
bubble
A thin film of liquid inflated with air or gas; as, a soap bubble; bubbles on the surface of a river.
buat
A lantern; also, the moon.
bubale
A large antelope (Alcelaphus bubalis) of Egypt and the Desert of Sahara, supposed by some to be the fallow deer of the Bible.
bubo
An inflammation, with enlargement, of a lymphatic gland, esp. in the groin, as in syphilis.
buccal
Of or pertaining to the mouth or cheeks.
bucranium
A sculptured ornament, representing an ox skull adorned with wreaths, etc.
buck
Lye or suds in which cloth is soaked in the operation of bleaching, or in which clothes are washed.
bucolic
Of or pertaining to the life and occupation of a shepherd; pastoral; rustic.
buddha
The title of an incarnation of self-abnegation, virtue, and wisdom, or a deified religious teacher of the Buddhists, esp.
budge
To move off; to stir; to walk away.
bugger
One guilty of buggery or unnatural vice; a sodomite.
buff
The color of buff; a light yellow, shading toward pink, gray, or brown.
budget
A bag or sack with its contents; hence, a stock or store; an accumulation; as, a budget of inventions.
budlet
A little bud springing from a parent bud.
bufo
A genus of Amphibia including various species of toads.
bugbane
A perennial white-flowered herb of the order Ranunculaceae and genus Cimiciguga; bugwort. There are several species.
buhrstone
A cellular, flinty rock, used for mill stones.
bugle
A sort of wild ox; a buffalo.
buhlwork
Decorative woodwork in which tortoise shell, yellow metal, white metal, etc., are inlaid, forming scrolls, cartouches, etc.
build
To raise or place on a foundation; to form, establish, or produce by using appropriate means.
bulau
An East Indian insectivorous mammal (Gymnura Rafflesii), somewhat like a rat in appearance, but allied to the hedgehog.
bump
To strike, as with or against anything large or solid; to thump; as, to bump the head against a wall.
bulse
A purse or bag in which to carry or measure diamonds, etc.
bulk
Magnitude of material substance; dimensions; mass; size; as, an ox or ship of great bulk.
bulge
The bilge or protuberant part of a cask.
bulimy
A disease in which there is a perpetual and insatiable appetite for food; a diseased and voracious appetite.
bull
The male of any species of cattle (Bovidae); hence, the male of any large quadruped, as the elephant; also, the male of the whale.
bulrush
A kind of large rush, growing in wet land or in water.
bumbailiff
See Bound bailiff, under Bound, a.
bultel
A bolter or bolting cloth; also, bran.
bulwark
A rampart; a fortification; a bastion or outwork.
bumkin
A projecting beam or boom; as: (a) One projecting from each bow of a vessel, to haul the fore tack to, called a tack bumpkin.
bummalo
A small marine Asiatic fish (Saurus ophidon) used in India as a relish; -- called also Bombay duck.
bunny
A great collection of ore without any vein coming into it or going out from it.
bund
League; confederacy; esp. the confederation of German states.
bunn
A slightly sweetened raised cake or bisquit with a glazing of sugar and milk on the top crust.
bunch
A protuberance; a hunch; a knob or lump; a hump.
bung
The large stopper of the orifice in the bilge of a cask.
bunk
A wooden case or box, which serves for a seat in the daytime and for a bed at night.
bunion
An enlargement and inflammation of a small membranous sac (one of the bursae muscosae), usually occurring on the first joint of the great toe.
bunodonts
A division of the herbivorous mammals including the hogs and hippopotami; -- so called because the teeth are tuberculated.
bunt
A fungus (Ustilago foetida) which affects the ear of cereals, filling the grains with a fetid dust; -- also called pepperbrand.
burbot
A fresh-water fish of the genus Lota, having on the nose two very small barbels, and a larger one on the chin.
buoy
To keep from sinking in a fluid, as in water or air; to keep afloat; -- with up.
burdelais
A sort of grape.
callot
A close cap without visor or brim.
cabree
The pronghorn antelope.
butyl
A compound radical, regarded as butane, less one atom of hydrogen.
buscon
One who searches for ores; a prospector.
burman
A member of the Burman family, one of the four great families Burmah; also, sometimes, any inhabitant of Burmah; a Burmese.
burial
A grave; a tomb; a place of sepulture.
burg
A fortified town.
burrhel
The wild Himalayan, or blue, sheep (Ovis burrhel).
burke
To murder by suffocation, or so as to produce few marks of violence, for the purpose of obtaining a body to be sold for dissection.
burl
To dress or finish up (cloth); to pick knots, burs, loose threads, etc., from, as in finishing cloth.
bursal
Of or pertaining to a bursa or to bursae.
burn
To consume with fire; to reduce to ashes by the action of heat or fire; -- frequently intensified by up: as, to burn up wood.
burr
A prickly seed vessel. See Bur, 1.
burton
A peculiar tackle, formed of two or more blocks, or pulleys, the weight being suspended to a hook block in the bight of the running part.
bury
A borough; a manor; as, the Bury of St. Edmond's
busy
Constantly at work; diligent; active.
busk
A thin, elastic strip of metal, whalebone, wood, or other material, worn in the front of a corset.
bush
A thicket, or place abounding in trees or shrubs; a wild forest.
busily
In a busy manner.
buss
A kiss; a rude or playful kiss; a smack.
bust
A piece of sculpture representing the upper part of the human figure, including the head, shoulders, and breast.
butler
An officer in a king's or a nobleman's household, whose principal business it is to take charge of the liquors, plate, etc.
butane
An inflammable gaseous hydrocarbon, C4H10, of the marsh gas, or paraffin, series.
butcher
One who slaughters animals, or dresses their flesh for market; one whose occupation it is to kill animals for food.
butment
A buttress of an arch; the supporter, or that part which joins it to the upright pier.
butt
To join at the butt, end, or outward extremity; to terminate; to be bounded; to abut.
byss
See Byssus, n., 1.
byard
A piece of leather crossing the breast, used by the men who drag sledges in coal mines.
buxom
Yielding; pliable or compliant; ready to obey; obedient; tractable; docile; meek; humble.
buxeous
Belonging to the box tree.
buxine
An alkaloid obtained from the Buxus sempervirens, or common box tree. It is identical with bebeerine; -- called also buxina.
buyer
One who buys; a purchaser.
buzz
To sound forth by buzzing.
bypath
A private path; an obscure way; indirect means.
bygone
Something gone by or past; a past event.
byname
To give a nickname to.
byplay
Action carried on aside, and commonly in dumb show, while the main action proceeds.
byroad
A private or obscure road.
cabal
Tradition; occult doctrine. See Cabala
byword
A common saying; a proverb; a saying that has a general currency.
bystander
One who stands near; a spectator; one who has no concern with the business transacting.
byway
A secluded, private, or obscure way; a path or road aside from the main one.
byzantine
A gold coin, so called from being coined at Byzantium. See Bezant.
caaba
The small and nearly cubical stone building, toward which all Mohammedans must pray.
cabiai
The capybara. See Capybara.
cabbage
An esculent vegetable of many varieties, derived from the wild Brassica oleracea of Europe. The common cabbage has a compact head of leaves.
cabesse
The finest kind of silk received from India.
cabman
The driver of a cab.
cable
A large, strong rope or chain, of considerable length, used to retain a vessel at anchor, and for other purposes.
cabob
A small piece of mutton or other meat roasted on a skewer; -- so called in Turkey and Persia.
caftan
A garment worn throughout the Levant, consisting of a long gown with sleeves reaching below the hands.
cadge
To carry, as a burden.
cacochymy
A vitiated state of the humors, or fluids, of the body, especially of the blood.
cacaine
The essential principle of cacao; -- now called theobromine.
caburn
A small line made of spun yarn, to bind or worm cables, seize tackles, etc.
cachaemia
A degenerated or poisoned condition of the blood.
cache
A hole in the ground, or hiding place, for concealing and preserving provisions which it is inconvenient to carry.
cack
To ease the body by stool; to go to stool.
cadastral
Of or pertaining to landed property.
cactaceous
Belonging to, or like, the family of plants of which the prickly pear is a common example.
cacuminal
Pertaining to the top of the palate; cerebral; -- applied to certain consonants; as, cacuminal (or cerebral) letters.
caddis
A kind of worsted lace or ribbon.
cade
Bred by hand; domesticated; petted.
caducary
Relating to escheat, forfeiture, or confiscation.
cadillac
A large pear, shaped like a flattened top, used chiefly for cooking.
cadi
An inferior magistrate or judge among the Mohammedans, usually the judge of a town or village.
caddie
A Scotch errand boy, porter, or messenger.
cadmia
An oxide of zinc which collects on the sides of furnaces where zinc is sublimed. Formerly applied to the mineral calamine.
cadrans
An instrument with a graduated disk by means of which the angles of gems are measured in the process of cutting and polishing.
cafe
A coffeehouse; a restaurant; also, a room in a hotel or restaurant where coffee and liquors are served.
caecal
Of or pertaining to the caecum, or blind gut.
caesar
A Roman emperor, as being the successor of Augustus Caesar. Hence, a kaiser, or emperor of Germany, or any emperor or powerful ruler.
caffeic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, coffee.
cafileh
A caravan of travelers; a military supply train or government caravan; a string of pack horses.
cajole
To deceive with flattery or fair words; to wheedle.
cahoot
Partnership; as, to go in cahoot with a person.
cagmag
A tough old goose; hence, coarse, bad food of any kind.
cage
A box or inclosure, wholly or partly of openwork, in wood or metal, used for confining birds or other animals.
cagit
A kind of parrot, of a beautiful green color, found in the Philippine Islands.
cagot
One of a race inhabiting the valleys of the Pyrenees, who until 1793 were political and social outcasts (Christian Pariahs).
cahier
A number of sheets of paper put loosely together; esp. one of the successive portions of a work printed in numbers.
caird
A traveling tinker; also a tramp or sturdy beggar.
caimacam
The governor of a sanjak or district in Turkey.
caique
A light skiff or rowboat used on the Bosporus; also, a Levantine vessel of larger size.
caisson
A chest to hold ammunition.
caitiff
Captive; wretched; unfortunate.
caledonia
The ancient Latin name of Scotland; -- still used in poetry.
calabar
A district on the west coast of Africa.
cajuput
A highly stimulating volatile inflammable oil, distilled from the leaves of an East Indian tree (Melaleuca cajuputi, etc.
cake
A small mass of dough baked; especially, a thin loaf from unleavened dough; as, an oatmeal cake; johnnycake.
calcaneal
Pertaining to the calcaneum; as, calcaneal arteries.
caldron
A large kettle or boiler of copper, brass, or iron. [Written also cauldron.]
calk
An instrument with sharp points, worn on the sole of a shoe or boot, to prevent slipping.
calf
Leather made of the skin of the calf; especially, a fine, light-colored leather used in bookbinding; as, to bind books in calf.
cali
The tenth avatar or incarnation of the god Vishnu.
calm
To make calm; to render still or quiet, as elements; as, to calm the winds.
call
To command or request to come or be present; to summon; as, to call a servant.
caloric
Of or pertaining to caloric.
capricioso
In a free, fantastic style.
canna
A measure of length in Italy, varying from six to seven feet. See Cane, 4.
camlet
A woven fabric originally made of camel's hair, now chiefly of goat's hair and silk, or of wool and cotton.
calx
Broken and refuse glass, returned to the post.
caltrap
An instrument with four iron points, so disposed that, any three of them being on the ground, the other projects upward.
calotype
A method of taking photographic pictures, on paper sensitized with iodide of silver; -- also called Talbotype, from the inventor, Mr.
calque
See 2d Calk, v. t.
calumbin
A bitter principle extracted as a white crystalline substance from the calumba root.
calvaria
The bones of the cranium; more especially, the bones of the domelike upper portion.
camber
An upward convexity of a deck or other surface; as, she has a high camber (said of a vessel having an unusual convexity of deck).
calyciform
Having the form or appearance of a calyx.
camaieu
Painting in shades of one color; monochrome.
came
A slender rod of cast lead, with or without grooves, used, in casements and stained-glass windows, to hold together the panes or pieces of glass.
camis
A light, loose dress or robe.
cancan
A rollicking French dance, accompanied by indecorous or extravagant postures and gestures.
camonflet
A small mine, sometimes formed in the wall or side of an enemy's gallery, to blow in the earth and cut off the retreat of the miners.
cammock
A plant having long hard, crooked roots, the Ononis spinosa; -- called also rest-harrow. The Scandix Pecten-Veneris is also called cammock.
chamomile
A genus of herbs (Anthemis) of the Composite family. The common camomile, A. nobilis, is used as a popular remedy.
camp
The ground or spot on which tents, huts, etc., are erected for shelter, as for an army or for lumbermen, etc.
canaanite
A descendant of Canaan, the son of Ham, and grandson of Noah.
cannicula
The Dog Star; Sirius.
cand
Fluor spar. See Kand.
cane
A name given to several peculiar palms, species of Calamus and Daemanorops, having very long, smooth flexible stems, commonly called rattans.
canicular
Pertaining to, or measured, by the rising of the Dog Star.
canker
Anything which corrodes, corrupts, or destroy.
cape
A piece or point of land, extending beyond the adjacent coast into the sea or a lake; a promontory; a headland.
canvas
A strong cloth made of hemp, flax, or cotton; -- used for tents, sails, etc.
canonicals
The dress prescribed by canon to be worn by a clergyman when officiating. Sometimes, any distinctive professional dress.
canoe
A boat used by rude nations, formed of trunk of a tree, excavated, by cutting of burning, into a suitable shape.
cannonical
Of or pertaining to a canon; established by, or according to a , canon or canons.
cant
A corner; angle; niche.
canuck
A small or medium-sized hardy horse, common in Canada.
caoutchin
An inflammable, volatile, oily, liquid hydrocarbon, obtained by the destructive distillation of caoutchouc.
cany
Of or pertaining to cane or canes; abounding with canes.
canzone
A song or air for one or more voices, of Provencal origin, resembling, though not strictly, the madrigal.
capability
The quality of being capable; capacity; capableness; esp. intellectual power or ability.
capcase
A small traveling case or bandbox; formerly, a chest.
capitate
Headlike in form; also, having the distal end enlarged and rounded, as the stigmas of certain flowers.
capful
As much as will fill a cap.
cappeline
A hood-shaped bandage for the head, the shoulder, or the stump of an amputated limb.
capella
A brilliant star in the constellation Auriga.
capias
A writ or process commanding the officer to take the body of the person named in it, that is, to arrest him; -- also called writ of capias.
pacha
The chief admiral of the Turkish fleet.
capoc
A sort of cotton so short and fine that it can not be spun, used in the East Indies to line palanquins, to make mattresses, etc.
capling
The cap or coupling of a flail, through which the thongs pass which connect the handle and swingel.
capnomancy
Divination by means of the ascent or motion of smoke.
capra
A genus of ruminants, including the common goat.
cappadine
A floss or waste obtained from the cocoon after the silk has been reeled off, used for shag.
cariccio
A piece in a free form, with frequent digressions from the theme; a fantasia; -- often called caprice.
quarte
A position in thrusting or parrying, with the inside of the hand turned upward and the point of the weapon toward the adversary's right breast.
carl
A rude, rustic man; a churl.
carcajou
The wolverene; -- also applied, but erroneously, to the Canada lynx, and sometimes to the American badger.
capuccio
A capoch or hood.
capsaicin
A colorless crystalline substance extracted from the Capsicum annuum, and giving off vapors of intense acridity.
captain
A head, or chief officer
carabid
Of, pertaining to, or resembling, the genus Carbus or family Carabidae.
carbamic
Pertaining to an acid so called.
cargo
The lading or freight of a ship or other vessel; the goods, merchandise, or whatever is conveyed in a vessel or boat; load; freight.
card
A piece of pasteboard, or thick paper, blank or prepared for various uses; as, a playing card; a visiting card; a card of invitation; pl.
care
A burdensome sense of responsibility; trouble caused by onerous duties; anxiety; concern; solicitude.
cariama
A large, long-legged South American bird (Dicholophus cristatus) which preys upon snakes, etc. See Seriema.
cark
A noxious or corroding care; solicitude; worry.
carrol
A small closet or inclosure built against a window on the inner side, to sit in for study. The word was used as late as the 16th century.
carmagnole
A popular or Red Rebublican song and dance, of the time of the first French Revolution.
caroline
A silver coin once current in some parts of Italy, worth about seven cents.
carlist
A partisan of Charles X. of France, or of Don Carlos of Spain.
carnage
Flesh of slain animals or men.
carob
An evergreen leguminous tree (Ceratania Siliqua) found in the countries bordering the Mediterranean; the St.
carrigeen
A small, purplish, branching, cartilaginous seaweed (Chondrus crispus), which, when bleached, is the Irish moss of commerce.
carolin
A former gold coin of Germany worth nearly five dollars; also, a gold coin of Sweden worth nearly five dollars.
carp
To talk; to speak; to prattle.
carse
Low, fertile land; a river valley.
cart
A common name for various kinds of vehicles, as a Scythian dwelling on wheels, or a chariot.
cass
To render useless or void; to annul; to reject; to send away.
cascabel
The projection in rear of the breech of a cannon, usually a knob or breeching loop connected with the gun by a neck.
carvacrol
A thick oily liquid, C10H13.OH, of a strong taste and disagreeable odor, obtained from oil of caraway (Carum carui).
cartel
An agreement between belligerents for the exchange of prisoners.
carucage
A tax on every plow or plowland.
caryatid
Of or pertaining to a caryatid.
casal
Of or pertaining to case; as, a casal ending.
casing
The act or process of inclosing in, or covering with, a case or thin substance, as plaster, boards, etc.
case
A box and its contents; the quantity contained in a box; as, a case of goods; a case of instruments.
cash
A place where money is kept, or where it is deposited and paid out; a money box.
cask
A barrel-shaped vessel made of staves headings, and hoops, usually fitted together so as to hold liquids.
casque
A piece of defensive or ornamental armor (with or without a vizor) for the head and neck; a helmet.
catsup
A table sauce made from mushrooms, tomatoes, walnuts, etc.
catabasion
A vault under altar of a Greek church.
cast
To send or drive by force; to throw; to fling; to hurl; to impel.
casual
Happening or coming to pass without design, and without being foreseen or expected; accidental; fortuitous; coming by chance.
catboat
A small sailboat, with a single mast placed as far forward as possible, carring a sail extended by a gaff and long boom.
catch
To lay hold on; to seize, especially with the hand; to grasp (anything) in motion, with the effect of holding; as, to catch a ball.
catfall
A rope used in hoisting the anchor to the cathead.
catchwater
A ditch or drain for catching water. See Catchdrain.
cate
Food. [Obs.] See Cates.
catharist
One aiming at or pretending to a greater purity of like than others about him; -- applied to persons of various sects.
catgut
A cord of great toughness made from the intestines of animals, esp. of sheep, used for strings of musical instruments, etc.
cation
An electro-positive substance, which in electro-decomposition is evolved at the cathode; -- opposed to anion.
cite
To call upon officially or authoritatively to appear, as before a court; to summon.
chekmak
A turkish fabric of silk and cotton, with gold thread interwoven.
cephalad
Forwards; towards the head or anterior extremity of the body; opposed to caudad.
cazic
A chief or petty king among some tribes of Indians in America.
cauponize
To sell wine or victuals.
caudad
Backwards; toward the tail or posterior part.
catso
A base fellow; a rogue; a cheat.
catmint
A well-know plant of the genus Nepeta (N. Cataria), somewhat like mint, having a string scent, and sometimes used in medicine.
catonian
Of, pertaining to, or resembling, the stern old Roman, Cato the Censor; severe; inflexible.
cattle
Quadrupeds of the Bovine family; sometimes, also, including all domestic quadrupeds, as sheep, goats, horses, mules, asses, and swine.
caucasian
Of or pertaining to the Caucasus, a mountainous region between the Black and Caspian seas.
cauker
See Cawk, Calker.
cauf
A chest with holes for keeping fish alive in water.
caught
Imp. & p. p. of Catch.
caul
A covering of network for the head, worn by women; also, a net.
cauma
Great heat, as of the body in fever.
cavort
To prance ostentatiously; -- said of a horse or his rider.
cavalcade
A procession of persons on horseback; a formal, pompous march of horsemen by way of parade.
causable
Capable of being caused.
cautel
Caution; prudence; wariness.
cave
A hollow place in the earth, either natural or artificial; a subterraneous cavity; a cavern; a den.
caviar
The roes of the sturgeon, prepared and salted; -- used as a relish, esp. in Russia.
caxton
Any book printed by William Caxton, the first English printer.
cavy
A rodent of the genera Cavia and Dolichotis, as the guinea pig (Cavia cobaya). Cavies are natives of South America.
cawk
An opaque, compact variety of barite, or heavy spar.
cayman
The south America alligator. See Alligator.
cayugas
A tribe of Indians formerly inhabiting western New-York, forming part of the confederacy called the Five Nations.
celibacy
The state of being unmarried; single life, esp. that of a bachelor, or of one bound by vows not to marry.
cedilla
A mark placed under the letter c [thus, c], to show that it is to be sounded like s, as in facade.
cecutiency
Partial blindness, or a tendency to blindness.
cease
To come to an end; to stop; to leave off or give over; to desist; as, the noise ceased.
cecidomyia
A genus of small dipterous files, including several very injurious species, as the Hessian fly. See Hessian fly.
cedar
The name of several evergreen trees. The wood is remarkable for its durability and fragrant odor.
cede
To yield or surrender; to give up; to resign; as, to cede a fortress, a province, or country, to another nation, by treaty.
ceil
To overlay or cover the inner side of the roof of; to furnish with a ceiling; as, to ceil a room.
cedrat
Properly the citron, a variety of Citrus medica, with large fruits, not acid, and having a high perfume.
cedule
A scroll; a writing; a schedule.
celadon
A pale sea-green color; also, porcelain or fine pottery of this tint.
celebrate
To extol or honor in a solemn manner; as, to celebrate the name of the Most High.
cement
Any substance used for making bodies adhere to each other, as mortar, glue, etc.
celsiture
Height; altitude.
cell
A very small and close apartment, as in a prison or in a monastery or convent; the hut of a hermit.
celotomy
The act or operation of cutting, to relieve the structure in strangulated hernia.
celt
A weapon or implement of stone or metal, found in the tumuli, or barrows, of the early Celtic nations.
cembalo
An old name for the harpsichord.
cense
A census; -- also, a public rate or tax.
cenanthy
The absence or suppression of the essential organs (stamens and pistil) in a flower.
cenobite
One of a religious order, dwelling in a convent, or a community, in opposition to an anchoret, or hermit, who lives in solitude.
cent
A hundred; as, ten per cent, the proportion of ten parts in a hundred.
cepevorous
Feeding upon onions.
chace
See 3d Chase, n., 3.
ceryl
A radical, C27H55 supposed to exist in several compounds obtained from Chinese wax, beeswax, etc.
cernuous
Inclining or nodding downward; pendulous; drooping; -- said of a bud, flower, fruit, or the capsule of a moss.
cercal
Of or pertaining to the tail.
ceraceous
Having the texture and color of new wax; like wax; waxy.
cerberean
Of or pertaining to, or resembling, Cerberus.
cere
The soft naked sheath at the base of the beak of birds of prey, parrots, and some other birds. See Beak.
cerin
A waxy substance extracted by alcohol or ether from cork; sometimes applied also to the portion of beeswax which is soluble in alcohol.
certain
Assured in mind; having no doubts; free from suspicions concerning.
cerograph
A writing on wax.
cerrial
Of or pertaining to the cerris.
cerulean
Sky-colored; blue; azure.
cervantite
See under Antimony.
cetic
Of or pertaining to a whale.
cest
A woman's girdle; a cestus.
cespitine
An oil obtained by distillation of peat, and containing various members of the pyridine series.
cess
To rate; to tax; to assess.
cetacean
One of the Cetacea.
cete
One of the Cetacea, or collectively, the Cetacea.
cetylic
Of, pertaining to, or derived from, spermaceti.
cetologist
One versed in cetology.
cetraric
Pertaining to, or derived from, the lichen, Iceland moss (Cetaria Islandica).
ceylanite
A dingy blue, or grayish black, variety of spinel. It is also called pleonaste.
chab
The red-bellied wood pecker (Melanerpes Carolinus).
chap
To cause to open in slits or chinks; to split; to cause the skin of to crack or become rough.
chain
That which confines, fetters, or secures, as a chain; a bond; as, the chains of habit.
chaetetes
A genus of fossil corals, common in the lower Silurian limestones.
chak
To toss up the head frequently, as a horse to avoid the restraint of the bridle.
chacma
A large species of African baboon (Cynocephalus porcarius); -- called also ursine baboon. [See Illust.
chafe
To excite heat in by friction; to rub in order to stimulate and make warm.
chagrin
Vexation; mortification.
cham
The sovereign prince of Tartary; -- now usually written khan.
chaja
The crested screamer of Brazil (Palamedea, / Chauna, chavaria), so called in imitation of its notes; -- called also chauna, and faithful kamichi.
chalaza
The place on an ovule, or seed, where its outer coats cohere with each other and the nucleus.
chance
A supposed material or psychical agent or mode of activity other than a force, law, or purpose; fortune; fate; -- in this sense often personified.
chaomancy
Divination by means of appearances in the air.
cheap
A bargain; a purchase; cheapness.
chat
To talk in a light and familiar manner; to converse without form or ceremony; to gossip.
char
A car; a chariot.
chasable
Capable of being chased; fit for hunting.
chauffer
A table stove or small furnace, usually a cylindrical box of sheet iron, with a grate at the bottom, and an open top.
chaw
To grind with the teeth; to masticate, as food in eating; to chew, as the cud; to champ, as the bit.
cheddar
Of or pertaining to, or made at, Cheddar, in England; as, Cheddar cheese.
chebacco
A narrow-sterned boat formerly much used in the Newfoundland fisheries; -- called also pinkstern and chebec.
check
A condition of interrupted or impeded progress; arrest; stop; delay; as, to hold an enemy in check.
chef
A chief of head person.
cheek
The side of the face below the eye.
cheirepter
One of the Cheiroptera.
chufa
A sedgelike plant (Cyperus esculentus) producing edible tubers, native about the Mediterranean, now cultivated in many regions; the earth almond.
chit
The embryo or the growing bud of a plant; a shoot; a sprout; as, the chits of Indian corn or of potatoes.
chic
Good form; style.
cherimoyer
A small downy-leaved tree (Anona Cherimolia), with fragrant flowers. It is a native of Peru.
cheng
A chinese reed instrument, with tubes, blown by the mouth.
chela
The pincherlike claw of Crustacea and Arachnida.
chemic
A chemist; an alchemist.
chepster
The European starling.
chequing
A coin. See Sequin.
cheval
A horse; hence, a support or frame.
chess
A game played on a chessboard, by two persons, with two differently colored sets of men, sixteen in each set.
chetvert
A measure of grain equal to 0.7218 of an imperial quarter, or 5.95 Winchester bushels.
chew
To bite and grind with the teeth; to masticate.
chian
Of or pertaining to Chios, an island in the Aegean Sea.
chilblain
To produce chilblains upon.
niere
One who gathers rags and odds and ends; a ragpicker.
chide
To rebuke; to reprove; to scold; to find fault with.
chief
The principal part; the most valuable portion.
chignon
A knot, boss, or mass of hair, natural or artificial, worn by a woman at the back of the head.
chikara
The goat antelope (Tragops Bennettii) of India.
chip
To cut small pieces from; to diminish or reduce to shape, by cutting away a little at a time; to hew.
chimaera
A cartilaginous fish of several species, belonging to the order Holocephali. The teeth are few and large.
chin
The lower extremity of the face below the mouth; the point of the under jaw.
chiragra
Gout in the hand.
chisel
A tool with a cutting edge on one end of a metal blade, used in dressing, shaping, or working in timber, stone, metal, etc.
choose
To make choice of; to select; to take by way of preference from two or more objects offered; to elect; as, to choose the least of two evils.
chode
The old imp. of chide. See Chide.
chloasma
A cutaneous affection characterized by yellow or yellowish brown pigmented spots.
chivachie
A cavalry raid; hence, a military expedition.
chlamydate
Having a mantle; -- applied to certain gastropods.
choanoid
Funnel-shaped; -- applied particularly to a hollow muscle attached to the ball of the eye in many reptiles and mammals.
chock
To stop or fasten, as with a wedge, or block; to scotch; as, to chock a wheel or cask.
cholaemaa
A disease characterized by severe nervous symptoms, dependent upon the presence of the constituents of the bile in the blood.
choice
The power or opportunity of choosing; option.
choke
To render unable to breathe by filling, pressing upon, or squeezing the windpipe; to stifle; to suffocate; to strangle.
chomp
To chew loudly and greedily; to champ.
chondrify
To convert, or be converted, into cartilage.
chrism
The same as Chrisom.
chose
A thing; personal property.
chop
To cut by striking repeatedly with a sharp instrument; to cut into pieces; to mince; -- often with up.
choragic
Of or pertaining to a choragus.
chouan
One of the royalist insurgents in western France (Brittany, etc.), during and after the French revolution.
chowchow
Consisting of several kinds mingled together; mixed; as, chowchow sweetmeats (preserved fruits put together).
chthonic
Pertaining to the earth; earthy; as, chthonic religions.
chromate
A salt of chromic acid.
chrysalid
Pertaining to a chrysalis; resembling a chrysalis.
chuck
To make a noise resembling that of a hen when she calls her chickens; to cluck.
chub
A species to fresh-water fish of the Cyprinidae or Carp family. The common European species is Leuciscus cephalus; the cheven.
chud
To champ; to bite.
cimeliarch
A superintendent or keeper of a church's valuables; a churchwarden.
cicala
A cicada. See Cicada.
churn
To stir, beat, or agitate, as milk or cream in a churn, in order to make butter.
chunam
Quicklime; also, plaster or mortar.
chulan
The fragrant flowers of the Chloranthus inconspicuus, used in China for perfuming tea.
chum
A roommate, especially in a college or university; an old and intimate friend.
church
A building set apart for Christian worship.
chirm
Clamor, or confused noise; buzzing.
chyme
The pulpy mass of semi-digested food in the small intestines just after its passage from the stomach.
chutnee
A warm or spicy condiment or pickle made in India, compounded of various vegetable substances, sweets, acids, etc.
chylaceous
Possessed of the properties of chyle; consisting of chyle.
cibarious
Pertaining to food; edible.
cibol
A perennial alliaceous plant (Allium fistulosum), sometimes called Welsh onion. Its fistular leaves areused in cookery.
cierge
A wax candle used in religous rites.
ciclatoun
A costly cloth, of uncertain material, used in the Middle Ages.
cicely
Any one of several umbelliferous plants, of the genera Myrrhis, Osmorrhiza, etc.
cicisbeism
The state or conduct of a cicisbeo.
cicuration
The act of taming.
cider
The expressed juice of apples. It is used as a beverage, for making vinegar, and for other purposes.
cill
See Sill., n. a foundation.
cigar
A small roll of tobacco, used for smoking.
cilia
Hairlike processes, commonly marginal and forming a fringe like the eyelash.
cima
A kind of molding. See Cyma.
cimbal
A kind of confectionery or cake.
circ
An amphitheatrical circle for sports; a circus.
cingalese
A native or natives of Ceylon descended from its primitive inhabitants
cinch
A strong saddle girth, as of canvas.
cimmerian
Pertaining to the Cimmerii, a fabulous people, said to have lived, in very ancient times, in profound and perpetual darkness.
cimolite
A soft, earthy, clayey mineral, of whitish or grayish color.
cinder
Partly burned or vitrified coal, or other combustible, in which fire is extinct.
cineraria
A Linnaean genus of free-flowering composite plants, mostly from South Africa. Several species are cultivated for ornament.
cinura
The group of Thysanura which includes Lepisma and allied forms; the bristletails. See Bristletail, and Lepisma.
cinnabar
Red sulphide of mercury, occurring in brilliant red crystals, and also in red or brown amorphous masses.
cinque
Five; the number five in dice or cards.
cipher
A character [0] which, standing by itself, expresses nothing, but when placed at the right hand of a whole number, increases its value tenfold.
cipolin
A whitish marble, from Rome, containiing pale greenish zones. It consists of calcium carbonate, with zones and cloudings of talc.
ciselure
The process of chasing on metals; also, the work thus chased.
cirsocele
The varicose dilatation of the spermatic vein.
cirque
A circle; a circus; a circular erection or arrangement of objects.
cirrate
Having cirri along the margin of a part or organ.
cisalpine
On the hither side of the Alps with reference to Rome, that is, on the south side of the Alps; -- opposed to transalpine.
cisco
The Lake herring (Coregonus Artedi), valuable food fish of the Great Lakes of North America. The name is also applied to C.
cispadane
On the hither side of the river Po with reference to Rome; that is, on the south side.
cisleithan
On the Austrian side of the river Leitha; Austrian.
cismontane
On this side of the mountains. See under Ultramontane.
cisted
Inclosed in a cyst. See Cysted.
cissoid
A curve invented by Diocles, for the purpose of solving two celebrated problems of the higher geometry; viz.
citable
Capable of being cited.
coccinella
A genus of small beetles of many species. They and their larvae feed on aphids or plant lice, and hence are of great benefit to man.
cloaca
A sewer; as, the Cloaca Maxima of Rome.
clavated
Club-shaped; having the form of a club; growing gradually thicker toward the top. [See Illust. of Antennae.
clachan
A small village containing a church.
city
The collective body of citizens, or inhabitants of a city.
citole
A musical instrument; a kind of dulcimer.
cithara
An ancient instrument resembling the harp.
citicism
The manners of a cit or citizen.
citraconic
Pertaining to, derived from, or having certain characteristics of, citric and aconitic acids.
cittern
An instrument shaped like a lute, but strung with wire and played with a quill or plectrum.
cizar
To clip with scissors.
civet
A substance, of the consistence of butter or honey, taken from glands in the anal pouch of the civet (Viverra civetta).
civic
Relating to, or derived from, a city or citizen; relating to man as a member of society, or to civil affairs.
cize
Bulk; largeness. [Obs.] See Size.
clabber
Milk curdled so as to become thick.
clap
To thrust, drive, put, or close, in a hasty or abrupt manner; -- often followed by to, into, on, or upon.
claim
To ask for, or seek to obtain, by virtue of authority, right, or supposed right; to challenge as a right; to demand as due.
clad
Imp. & p. p. of Clothe.
claggy
Adhesive; -- said of a roof in a mine to which coal clings.
clam
Strong pinchers or forceps.
clancular
Conducted with secrecy; clandestine; concealed.
clash
To make a noise by striking against something; to dash noisily together.
claque
A collection of persons employed to applaud at a theatrical exhibition.
clare
A nun of the order of St. Clare.
clathrate
Shaped like a lattice; cancellate.
claudent
Shutting; confining; drawing together; as, a claudent muscle.
clever
Possessing quickness of intellect, skill, dexterity, talent, or adroitness; expert.
cledge
The upper stratum of fuller's earth.
cleading
A jacket or outer covering of wood, etc., to prevent radiation of heat, as from the boiler, cylinder.
claw
A sharp, hooked nail, as of a beast or bird.
clay
A soft earth, which is plastic, or may be molded with the hands, consisting of hydrous silicate of aluminium.
clerestory
The upper story of the nave of a church, containing windows, and rising above the aisle roofs.
clearwing
A lepidopterous insect with partially transparent wings, of the family Aegeriadae, of which the currant and peach-tree borers are examples.
clem
To starve; to famish.
clef
A character used in musical notation to determine the position and pitch of the scale as represented on the staff.
cleg
A small breeze or horsefly.
clepe
To call, or name.
clergeon
A chorister boy.
climacter
See Climacteric, n.
clidastes
A genus of extinct marine reptiles, allied to the Mosasaurus. See Illust. in Appendix.
clew
To direct; to guide, as by a thread.
cliche
A stereotype plate or any similar reproduction of ornament, or lettering, in relief.
cliency
State of being a client.
cliff
A high, steep rock; a precipice.
clip
To embrace, hence; to encompass.
clinch
To hold firmly; to hold fast by grasping or embracing tightly.
clio
The Muse who presided over history.
clitellus
A thickened glandular portion of the body of the adult earthworm, consisting of several united segments modified for reproductive purposes.
clique
A narrow circle of persons associated by common interests or for the accomplishment of a common purpose; -- generally used in a bad sense.
clivity
Inclination; ascent or descent; a gradient.
cnemial
Pertaining to the shin bone.
clown
A man of coarse nature and manners; an awkward fellow; an ill-bred person; a boor.
clonic
Having an irregular, convulsive motion.
clog
That which hinders or impedes motion; hence, an encumbrance, restraint, or impediment, of any kind.
clock
A machine for measuring time, indicating the hour and other divisions by means of hands moving on a dial plate.
clod
A lump or mass, especially of earth, turf, or clay.
cloister
An inclosed place.
clomben
Imp. & p. p. of Climb (for climbed).
clot
A concretion or coagulation; esp. a soft, slimy, coagulated mass, as of blood; a coagulum.
cloom
To close with glutinous matter.
close
To stop, or fill up, as an opening; to shut; as, to close the eyes; to close a door.
cloud
A collection of visible vapor, or watery particles, suspended in the upper atmosphere.
clove
A cleft; a gap; a ravine; -- rarely used except as part of a proper name; as, Kaaterskill Clove; Stone Clove.
clunch
Indurated clay. See Bind, n., 3.
cluck
To make the noise, or utter the call, of a brooding hen.
cloy
To fill or choke up; to stop up; to clog.
club
A heavy staff of wood, usually tapering, and wielded the hand; a weapon; a cudgel.
clue
A ball of thread; a thread or other means of guidance. Same as Clew.
clumber
A kind of field spaniel, with short legs and stout body, which, unlike other spaniels, hunts silently.
clutch
A gripe or clinching with, or as with, the fingers or claws; seizure; grasp.
clupeoid
Of or pertaining to the Herring family.
cluster
A number of things of the same kind growing together; a bunch.
clypeate
Shaped like a round buckler or shield; scutate.
clysmian
Connected with, or related to, the deluge, or to a cataclysm; as, clysmian changes.
coarctate
To press together; to crowd; to straiten; to confine closely.
coaita
The native name of certain South American monkeys of the genus Ateles, esp. A. paniscus. The black-faced coaita is Ateles ater.
coadapted
Adapted one to another; as, coadapted pulp and tooth.
cnida
One of the peculiar stinging, cells found in Coelenterata; a nematocyst; a lasso cell.
coacervate
Raised into a pile; collected into a crowd; heaped.
coafforest
To convert into, or add to, a forest.
coag
See Coak, a kind of tenon.
coamings
Raised pieces of wood of iron around a hatchway, skylight, or other opening in the deck, to prevent water from running bellow; esp.
coak
A kind of tenon connecting the face of a scarfed timber with the face of another timber, or a dowel or pin of hard wood or iron uniting timbers.
coal
A thoroughly charred, and extinguished or still ignited, fragment from wood or other combustible substance; charcoal.
coannex
To annex with something else.
coaptation
The adaptation or adjustment of parts to each other, as of a broken bone or dislocated joint.
cobia
An oceanic fish of large size (Elacate canada); the crabeater; -- called also bonito, cubbyyew, coalfish, and sergeant fish.
coax
To persuade by gentle, insinuating courtesy, flattering, or fondling; to wheedle; to soothe.
coast
The side of a thing.
coat
An outer garment fitting the upper part of the body; especially, such a garment worn by men.
cobaea
A genus of climbing plants, native of Mexico and South America. C. scandens is a conservatory climber with large bell-shaped flowers.
cobbing
Haughty; purse-proud. See Cob, n., 2.
cobourg
A thin worsted fabric for women's dresses.
coble
A flat-floored fishing boat with a lug sail, and a drop rudder extending from two to four feet below the keel.
cobnut
A large roundish variety of the cultivated hazelnut.
cobwall
A wall made of clay mixed with straw.
cobra
The cobra de capello.
coca
The dried leaf of a South American shrub (Erythroxylon Coca). In med., called Erythroxylon.
cole
A plant of the Brassica or Cabbage genus; esp. that form of B. oleracea called rape and coleseed.
coffee
The coffee tree.
codpiece
A part of male dress in front of the breeches, formerly made very conspicuous.
codder
A gatherer of cods or peas.
cocoa
A preparation made from the seeds of the chocolate tree, and used in making, a beverage; also the beverage made from cocoa or cocoa shells.
cochineal
A dyestuff consisting of the dried bodies of females of the Coccus cacti, an insect native in Mexico, Central America, etc.
cock
The male of birds, particularly of gallinaceous or domestic fowls.
coctible
Capable of being cooked.
coda
A few measures added beyond the natural termination of a composition.
codger
A miser or mean person.
codetta
A short passage connecting two sections, but not forming part of either; a short coda.
codfish
A kind of fish. Same as Cod.
codical
Relating to a codex, or a code.
codling
An apple fit to stew or coddle.
coendoo
The Brazilian porcupine (Cercolades, / Sphingurus, prehensiles), remarkable for its prehensile tail.
celiac
Relating to the abdomen, or to the cavity of the abdomen.
coehorn
A small bronze mortar mounted on a wooden block with handles, and light enough to be carried short distances by two men.
coelacanth
Having hollow spines, as some ganoid fishes.
coelodont
Having hollow teeth; -- said of a group lizards.
coemption
The act of buying the whole quantity of any commodity.
coetanean
A person coetaneous with another; a contemporary.
coequal
Being on an equality in rank or power.
coerce
To restrain by force, especially by law or authority; to repress; to curb.
coeval
Of the same age; existing during the same period of time, especially time long and remote; -- usually followed by with.
coexecutor
A joint executor.
coif
A close-fitting cap covering the sides of the head, like a small hood without a cape.
coguardian
A joint guardian.
cogitable
Capable of being brought before the mind as a thought or idea; conceivable; thinkable.
cogency
The quality of being cogent; power of compelling conviction; conclusiveness; force.
cogger
A flatterer or deceiver; a sharper.
cogman
A dealer in cogware or coarse cloth.
cognac
A kind of French brandy, so called from the town of Cognac.
coheir
A joint heir; one of two or more heirs; one of several entitled to an inheritance.
cogware
A coarse, narrow cloth, like frieze, used by the lower classes in the sixteenth century.
cohabit
To inhabit or reside in company, or in the same place or country.
cohibition
Hindrance; restraint.
cohobate
To repeat the distillation of, pouring the liquor back upon the matter remaining in the vessel.
coit
To throw, as a stone. [Obs.] See Quoit.
coin
A quoin; a corner or external angle; a wedge. See Coigne, and Quoin.
coigny
The practice of quartering one's self as landlord on a tenant; a quartering of one's self on anybody.
coil
To wind cylindrically or spirally; as, to coil a rope when not in use; the snake coiled itself before springing.
coir
A material for cordage, matting, etc., consisting of the prepared fiber of the outer husk of the cocoanut.
coistril
An inferior groom or lad employed by an esquire to carry the knight's arms and other necessaries.
coke
To convert into coke.
cojoin
To join; to conjoin.
cojuror
One who swears to another's credibility.
colchicum
A genus of bulbous-rooted plants found in many parts of Europe, including the meadow saffron.
colaborer
One who labors with another; an associate in labor.
cold
Deprived of heat, or having a low temperature; not warm or hot; gelid; frigid.
cond
To con, as a ship.
coma
A state of profound insensibility from which it is difficult or impossible to rouse a person. See Carus.
colocolo
A South American wild cat (Felis colocolo), of the size of the ocelot.
coleus
A plant of several species of the Mint family, cultivated for its bright-colored or variegated leaves.
collet
An inferior church servant. [Obs.] See Acolyte.
coaltit
A small European titmouse (Parus ater), so named from its black color; -- called also coalmouse and colemouse.
colic
A severe paroxysmal pain in the abdomen, due to spasm, obstruction, or distention of some one of the hollow viscera.
collagen
The chemical basis of ordinary connective tissue, as of tendons or sinews and of bone. On being boiled in water it becomes gelatin or glue.
colt
The young of the equine genus or horse kind of animals; -- sometimes distinctively applied to the male, filly being the female.
colportage
The distribution of religious books, tracts, etc., by colporteurs.
colstaff
A staff by means of which a burden is borne by two persons on their shoulders.
coluber
A genus of harmless serpents.
coly
Any bird of the genus Colius and allied genera. They inhabit Africa.
comose
Bearing a tuft of soft hairs or down, as the seeds of milkweed.
comfit
A dry sweetmeat; any kind of fruit, root, or seed preserved with sugar and dried; a confection.
comb
An instrument with teeth, for straightening, cleansing, and adjusting the hair, or for keeping it in place.
come
To move hitherward; to draw near; to approach the speaker, or some place or person indicated; -- opposed to go.
comic
Relating to comedy, as distinct from tragedy.
comma
A character or point [,] marking the smallest divisions of a sentence, written or printed.
comtism
Positivism; the positive philosophy. See Positivism.
compact
Joined or held together; leagued; confederated.
comrade
A mate, companion, or associate.
conacre
To underlet a portion of, for a single crop; -- said of a farm.
concave
Hollow; void of contents.
contact
A close union or junction of bodies; a touching or meeting.
conn
See Con, to direct a ship.
cong
An abbreviation of Congius.
cone
A shell of the genus Conus, having a conical form.
confab
Familiar talk or conversation.
conical
Of or pertaining to a cone; as, conic sections.
conject
To throw together, or to throw.
conscience
Knowledge of one's own thoughts or actions; consciousness.
conoid
Anything that has a form resembling that of a cone.
conquer
To subdue or overcome by mental or moral power; to surmount; as, to conquer difficulties, temptation, etc.
ties
Of Constitutionality
constrain
To secure by bonds; to chain; to bond or confine; to hold tightly; to constringe.
cool
Moderately cold; between warm and cold; lacking in warmth; producing or promoting coolness.
cony
A rabbit, esp., the European rabbit (Lepus cuniculus)
conundrum
A question to which only a conjectural answer can be made.
convalesce
To recover health and strength gradually, after sickness or weakness; as, a patient begins to convalesce.
cooee
A peculiar whistling sound made by the Australian aborigenes as a call or signal.
cook
To make the noise of the cuckoo.
coop
A barrel or cask for liquor.
coom
Soot; coal dust; refuse matter, as the dirty grease which comes from axle boxes, or the refuse at the mouth of an oven.
coon
A raccoon. See Raccoon.
coot
A wading bird with lobate toes, of the genus Fulica.
coordain
To ordain or appoint for some purpose along with another.
copal
A resinous substance flowing spontaneously from trees of Zanzibar, Madagascar, and South America (Trachylobium Hornemannianum, T.
debt
A duty neglected or violated; a fault; a sin; a trespass.
cumacea
An order of marine Crustacea, mostly of small size.
craunch
To crush with the teeth; to chew with violence and noise; to crunch.
coudee
A measure of length; the distance from the elbow to the end of the middle finger; a cubit.
corsage
The waist or bodice of a lady's dress; as, a low corsage.
corb
A basket used in coal mines, etc. see Corf.
coptic
Of or pertaining to the Copts.
copped
Rising to a point or head; conical; pointed; crested.
copier
One who copies; one who writes or transcribes from an original; a transcriber.
coplaner
Situated in one plane.
copra
The dried meat of the cocoanut, from which cocoanut oil is expressed.
cops
The connecting crook of a harrow.
copy
An abundance or plenty of anything.
copula
The word which unites the subject and predicate.
coplatry
Pertaining to copulation; tending or serving to unite; copulative.
coquelicot
The wild poppy, or red corn rose.
cora
The Arabian gazelle (Gazella Arabica), found from persia to North Africa.
cork
The outer layer of the bark of the cork tree (Quercus Suber), of which stoppers for bottles and casks are made.
core
A body of individuals; an assemblage.
corchorus
The common name of the Kerria Japonica or Japan globeflower, a yellow-flowered, perennial, rosaceous plant, seen in old-fashioned gardens.
cord
A string, or small rope, composed of several strands twisted together.
corf
A large basket used in carrying or hoisting coal or ore.
coriaceous
Consisting of or resembling, leather; leatherlike; tough.
corocore
A kind of boat of various forms, used in the Indian Archipelago.
corm
A solid bulb-shaped root, as of the crocus. See Bulb.
corn
A thickening of the epidermis at some point, esp. on the toes, by friction or pressure. It is usually painful and troublesome.
corporal
A noncommissioned officer, next below a sergeant. In the United States army he is the lowest noncommissioned officer in a company of infantry.
corrade
To gnaw into; to wear away; to fret; to consume.
cosupreme
A partaker of supremacy; one jointly supreme.
cosecant
The secant of the complement of an arc or angle. See Illust. of Functions.
corvee
An obligation to perform certain services, as the repair of roads, for the lord or sovereign.
cortege
A train of attendants; a procession.
coruscant
Glittering in flashes; flashing.
corybant
One of the priests of Cybele in Phrygia. The rites of the Corybants were accompanied by wild music, dancing, etc.
coscoroba
A large, white, South American duck, of the genus Cascoroba, resembling a swan.
cosmetical
Imparting or improving beauty, particularly the beauty of the complexion; as, a cosmetical preparation.
cosher
To levy certain exactions or tribute upon; to lodge and eat at the expense of. See Coshering.
cosier
A tailor who botches his work.
coss
A Hindoo measure of distance, varying from one and a half to two English miles.
cost
A rib; a side; a region or coast.
cotquean
A man who busies himself with affairs which properly belong to women.
cothurn
A buskin anciently used by tragic actors on the stage; hence, tragedy in general.
cotangent
The tangent of the complement of an arc or angle. See Illust. of Functions.
cote
A cottage or hut.
coticular
Pertaining to whetstones; like or suitable for whetstones.
cotland
Land appendant to a cot or cottage, or held by a cottager or cotter.
cottage
A small house; a cot; a hut.
cotrustee
A joint trustee.
cotswold
An open country abounding in sheepcotes, as in the Cotswold hills, in Gloucestershire, England.
cotyle
A cuplike cavity or organ. Same as Acetabulum.
coucal
A large, Old World, ground cuckoo of the genus Centropus, of several species.
cowslip
A common flower in England (Primula veris) having yellow blossoms and appearing in early spring. It is often cultivated in the United States.
cove
A retired nook; especially, a small, sheltered inlet, creek, or bay; a recess in the shore.
courage
The heart; spirit; temper; disposition.
coumaric
Relating to, derived from, or like, the Dipterix odorata, a tree of Guiana.
cough
To expel air, or obstructing or irritating matter, from the lungs or air passages, in a noisy and violent manner.
could
Was, should be, or would be, able, capable, or susceptible. Used as an auxiliary, in the past tense or in the conditional present.
council
A body of man elected or appointed to constitute an advisory or a legislative assembly; as, a governor's council; a city council.
coup
A sudden stroke; an unexpected device or stratagem; -- a term used in various ways to convey the idea of promptness and force.
couscous
A kind of food used by the natives of Western Africa, made of millet flour with flesh, and leaves of the baobab; -- called also lalo.
couage
To inspire with courage.
courageous
Possessing, or characterized by, courage; brave; bold.
couteau
A knife; a dagger.
couvade
A custom, among certain barbarous tribes, that when a woman gives birth to a child her husband takes to his bed, as if ill.
cowherd
One whose occupation is to tend cows.
cowbane
A poisonous umbelliferous plant; in England, the Cicuta virosa; in the United States, the Cicuta maculata and the Archemora rigida.
covin
A collusive agreement between two or more persons to prejudice a third.
cowan
One who works as a mason without having served a regular apprenticeship.
cower
To stoop by bending the knees; to crouch; to squat; hence, to quail; to sink through fear.
cowfish
A California dolphin (Tursiops Gillii).
coworker
One who works with another; a co/perator.
cowish
Timorous; fearful; cowardly.
cowl
A monk's hood; -- usually attached to the gown. The name was also applied to the hood and garment together.
cowquake
A genus of plants (Briza); quaking grass.
cowry
A marine shell of the genus Cypraea.
crab
One of the brachyuran Crustacea. They are mostly marine, and usually have a broad, short body, covered with a strong shell or carapace.
coyness
The quality of being coy; feigned o/ bashful unwillingness to become familiar; reserve.
coxcomb
A strip of red cloth notched like the comb of a cock, which licensed jesters formerly wore in their caps.
cowwheat
A weed of the genus Melampyrum, with black seeds, found on European wheatfields.
coxa
The first joint of the leg of an insect or crustacean.
coyish
Somewhat coy or reserved.
coyly
In a coy manner; with reserve.
cozen
To cheat; to defraud; to beguile; to deceive, usually by small arts, or in a pitiful way.
coyote
A carnivorous animal (Canis latrans), allied to the dog, found in the western part of North America; -- called also prairie wolf.
coypu
A South American rodent (Myopotamus coypus), allied to the beaver. It produces a valuable fur called nutria.
cozily
Snugly; comfortably.
cozy
Snug; comfortable; easy; contented.
crake
To cry out harshly and loudly, like the bird called crake.
craft
Strength; might; secret power.
crack
To break or burst, with or without entire separation of the parts; as, to crack glass; to crack nuts.
cradle
Infancy, or very early life.
crag
A steep, rugged rock; a rough, broken cliff, or point of a rock, on a ledge.
crail
A creel or osier basket.
crapaudine
Turning on pivots at the top and bottom; -- said of a door.
cram
To fill with food to satiety; to stuff.
crane
A measure for fresh herrings, -- as many as will fill a barrel.
crase
To break in pieces; to crack.
crare
A slow unwieldy trading vessel.
crataegus
A genus of small, hardy trees, including the hawthorn, much used for ornamental purposes.
croylstone
Crystallized cawk, in which the crystals are small.
cried
Imp. & p. p. of Cry.
creed
A definite summary of what is believed; esp., a summary of the articles of Christian faith; a confession of faith for public use; esp.
craze
To break into pieces; to crush; to grind to powder. See Crase.
crayfish
Any crustacean of the family Astacidae, resembling the lobster, but smaller, and found in fresh waters.
cravat
A neckcloth; a piece of silk, fine muslin, or other cloth, worn by men about the neck.
craw
The crop of a bird.
crawford
A Crawford peach; a well-known freestone peach, with yellow flesh, first raised by Mr. William Crawford, of New Jersey.
crayon
An implement for drawing, made of clay and plumbago, or of some preparation of chalk, usually sold in small prisms or cylinders.
creatress
She who creates.
creable
Capable of being created.
cretor
One who creates, produces, or constitutes. Specifically, the Supreme Being.
crebrous
Frequent; numerous.
credence
Reliance of the mind on evidence of facts derived from other sources than personal knowledge; belief; credit; confidence.
cretaceous
Having the qualities of chalk; abounding with chalk; chalky; as, cretaceous rocks and formations. See Chalk.
creole
One born of European parents in the American colonies of France or Spain or in the States which were once such colonies, esp.
cremaster
A thin muscle which serves to draw up the testicle.
crenated
Having the margin cut into rounded teeth notches, or scallops.
crepane
An injury in a horse's leg, caused by the shoe of one hind foot striking and cutting the other leg. It sometimes forms an ulcer.
crescence
Increase; enlargement.
crew
The Manx shearwater.
creux
Used in English only in the expression en creux. Thus, engraving en creux is engraving in intaglio, or by sinking or hollowing out the design.
crevalle
The cavally or jurel.
crib
A manger or rack; a feeding place for animals.
cric
The ring which turns inward and condenses the flame of a lamp.
croftland
Land of superior quality, on which successive crops are raised.
critic
One who passes a rigorous or captious judgment; one who censures or finds fault; a harsh examiner or judge; a caviler; a carper.
criosphinx
A sphinx with the head of a ram.
crime
Any violation of law, either divine or human; an omission of a duty commanded, or the commission of an act forbidden by law.
crinal
Of or pertaining to the hair.
cripple
One who creeps, halts, or limps; one who has lost, or never had, the use of a limb or limbs; a lame person; hence, one who is partially disabled.
crisp
Curling in stiff curls or ringlets; as, crisp hair.
crocein
A name given to any one of several yellow or scarlet dyestuffs of artificial production and complex structure.
crizzel
A kind of roughness on the surface of glass, which clouds its transparency.
croak
To make a low, hoarse noise in the throat, as a frog, a raven, or a crow; hence, to make any hoarse, dismal sound.
croft
A small, inclosed field, adjoining a house; a small farm.
crefting
Exposing linen to the sun, on the grass, in the process of bleaching.
crop
The pouchlike enlargement of the gullet of birds, serving as a receptacle for food; the craw.
cromlech
A monument of rough stones composed of one or more large ones supported in a horizontal position upon others.
croisado
A holy war; a crusade.
croker
A cultivator of saffron; a dealer in saffron.
crone
An old woman; -- usually in contempt.
croodle
To cower or cuddle together, as from fear or cold; to lie close and snug together, as pigs in straw.
crosier
The pastoral staff of a bishop (also of an archbishop, being the symbol of his office as a shepherd of the flock of God.
croquet
The act of croqueting.
crore
Ten millions; as, a crore of rupees (which is nearly $5,000,000).
crouch
To bend down; to stoop low; to lie close to the ground with the logs bent, as an animal when waiting for prey, or in fear.
crotalaria
A genus of leguminous plants; rattlebox.
crow
To make the shrill sound characteristic of a cock, either in joy, gayety, or defiance.
cube
A regular solid body, with six equal square sides.
crus
That part of the hind limb between the femur, or thigh, and the ankle, or tarsus; the shank.
cruller
A kind of sweet cake cut in strips and curled or twisted, and fried crisp in boiling fat.
crude
Unripe; not mature or perfect; immature.
croze
A cooper's tool for making the grooves for the heads of casks, etc.; also, the groove itself.
crucial
Having the form of a cross; appertaining to a cross; cruciform; intersecting; as, crucial ligaments; a crucial incision.
cruel
Causing, or fitted to cause, pain, grief, or misery.
cruise
See Cruse, a small bottle.
cruor
The coloring matter of the blood; the clotted portion of coagulated blood, containing the coloring matter; gore.
crumb
A small fragment or piece; especially, a small piece of bread or other food, broken or cut off.
crunch
To chew with force and noise; to craunch.
crup
Short; brittle; as, crup cake.
crural
Of or pertaining to the thigh or leg, or to any of the parts called crura; as, the crural arteries; crural arch; crural canal; crural ring.
cryolite
A fluoride of sodium and aluminum, found in Greenland, in white cleavable masses; -- used as a source of soda and alumina.
cruzado
A coin. See Crusado.
crut
The rough, shaggy part of oak bark.
crux
Anything that is very puzzling or difficult to explain.
cryer
The female of the hawk; a falcon-gentil.
crying
Calling for notice; compelling attention; notorious; heinous; as, a crying evil.
ctenocyst
An organ of the Ctenophora, supposed to be sensory.
crypt
A simple gland, glandular cavity, or tube; a follicle; as, the crypts of Lieberk/hn, the simple tubular glands of the small intestines.
crystal
The regular form which a substance tends to assume in solidifying, through the inherent power of cohesive attraction.
cuban
Of or pertaining to Cuba or its inhabitants.
cubbyhole
A snug or confined place.
cuinage
The stamping of pigs of tin, by the proper officer, with the arms of the duchy of Cornwall.
cucujo
The fire beetle of Mexico and the West Indies.
cuboid
Cube-shaped, or nearly so; as, the cuboid bone of the foot.
cubhood
The state of being a cub.
cubical
Having the form or properties of a cube; contained, or capable of being contained, in a cube.
cuckold
A man whose wife is unfaithful; the husband of an adulteress.
cucquean
A woman whose husband is unfaithful to her.
cudgel
A staff used in cudgel play, shorter than the quarterstaff, and wielded with one hand; hence, any heavy stick used as a weapon.
cudbear
A powder of a violet red color, difficult to moisten with water, used for making violet or purple dye.
cudden
A clown; a low rustic; a dolt.
cuff
To strike; esp., to smite with the palm or flat of the hand; to slap.
cufic
Of or pertaining to the older characters of the Arabic language.
culinarily
In the manner of a kitchen; in connection with a kitchen or cooking.
culasse
The lower faceted portion of a brilliant-cut diamond.
cuirass
A piece of defensive armor, covering the body from the neck to the girdle
cuish
Defensive armor for the thighs.
culdee
One of a class of anchorites who lived in various parts of Scotland, Ireland, and Wales.
culex
A genus of dipterous insects, including the gnat and mosquito.
culpable
Deserving censure; worthy of blame; faulty; immoral; criminal.
cull
To separate, select, or pick out; to choose and gather or collect; as, to cull flowers.
culm
The stalk or stem of grain and grasses (including the bamboo), jointed and usually hollow.
cult
Attentive care; homage; worship.
culrage
Smartweed (Polygonum Hydropiper).
culverin
A long cannon of the 16th century, usually an 18-pounder with serpent-shaped handles.
daft
Stupid; foolish; idiotic; also, delirious; insane; as, he has gone daft.
cuvette
A pot, bucket, or basin, in which molten plate glass is carried from the melting pot to the casting table.
curd
The coagulated or thickened part of milk, as distinguished from the whey, or watery part. It is eaten as food, especially when made into cheese.
cunner
A small edible fish of the Atlantic coast (Ctenolabrus adspersus); -- called also chogset, burgall, blue perch, and bait stealer.
cunabula
The earliest abode; original dwelling place; originals; as, the cunabula of the human race.
cumidine
A strong, liquid, organic base, C3H7.C6H4.NH2, homologous with aniline.
cumbent
Lying down; recumbent.
cumene
A colorless oily hydrocarbon, C6H5.C3H7, obtained by the distillation of cuminic acid; -- called also cumol.
cumshaw
A present or bonus; -- originally applied to that paid on ships which entered the port of Canton.
cumulate
To gather or throw into a heap; to heap together; to accumulate.
cuneal
Relating to a wedge; wedge-shaped.
cunctation
Delay; procrastination.
cund
To con (a ship).
cuniform
Pertaining to, or versed in, the ancient wedge-shaped characters, or the inscriptions in them.
cunette
A drain trench, in a ditch or moat; -- called also cuvette.
cupper
One who performs the operation of cupping.
cupful
As much as a cup will hold.
cupbearer
One whose office it is to fill and hand the cups at an entertainment.
cupel
A shallow porous cup, used in refining precious metals, commonly made of bone ashes (phosphate of lime).
cupid
The god of love, son of Venus; usually represented as a naked, winged boy with bow and arrow.
cupola
A roof having a rounded form, hemispherical or nearly so; also, a ceiling having the same form. When on a large scale it is usually called dome.
curability
The state of being curable; curableness.
cupreous
Consisting of copper or resembling copper; coppery.
cupulate
Having or bearing cupules; cupuliferous.
curb
To bend or curve
curculio
One of a large group of beetles (Rhynchophora) of many genera; -- called also weevils, snout beetles, billbeetles, and billbugs.
cuskin
A kind of drinking cup.
currant
A small kind of seedless raisin, imported from the Levant, chiefly from Zante and Cephalonia; -- used in cookery.
curia
One of the thirty parts into which the Roman people were divided by Romulus.
cure
Care, heed, or attention.
curfew
A utensil for covering the fire.
curl
To twist or form into ringlets; to crisp, as the hair.
curmudgeon
An avaricious, grasping fellow; a miser; a niggard; a churl.
curule
Of or pertaining to a chariot.
curse
To call upon divine or supernatural power to send injury upon; to imprecate evil upon; to execrate.
curt
Characterized by excessive brevity; short; rudely concise; as, curt limits; a curt answer.
curvant
Bowed; bent; curved.
cushat
The ringdove or wood pigeon.
cutgrass
A grass with leaves having edges furnished with very minute hooked prickles, which form a cutting edge; one or more species of Leersia.
cutaneous
Of pertaining to the skin; existing on, or affecting, the skin; as, a cutaneous disease; cutaneous absorption; cutaneous respiration.
cusp
A triangular protection from the intrados of an arch, or from an inner curve of tracery.
custard
A mixture of milk and eggs, sweetened, and baked or boiled.
cutchery
A hindoo hall of justice.
cute
Clever; sharp; shrewd; ingenious; cunning.
cutter
One who cuts; as, a stone cutter; a die cutter; esp., one who cuts out garments.
cuticle
The scarfskin or epidermis. See Skin.
cutlass
A short, heavy, curving sword, used in the navy. See Curtal ax.
cutty
A short tobacco pipe.
cytty
Short; as, a cutty knife; a cutty sark.
cutwal
The chief police officer of a large city.
cypsela
A one-seeded, one-celled, indehiscent fruit; an achene with the calyx tube adherent.
cymbling
A scalloped or "pattypan" variety of summer squash.
cydonin
A peculiar mucilaginous substance extracted from the seeds of the quince (Cydonia vulgaris), and regarded as a variety of amylose.
cyathiform
In the form of a cup, a little widened at the top.
cyamelide
A white amorphous substance, regarded as a polymeric modification of isocyanic acid.
cyanate
A salt of cyanic acid.
cycad
Any plant of the natural order Cycadaceae, as the sago palm, etc.
cyclamin
A white amorphous substance, regarded as a glucoside, extracted from the corm of Cyclamen Europaeum.
cyma
A member or molding of the cornice, the profile of which is wavelike in form.
cygnus
A constellation of the northern hemisphere east of, or following, Lyra; the Swan.
cylinder
The space inclosed by any cylindrical surface. The space may be limited or unlimited in length.
cymbal
A musical instrument used by the ancients. It is supposed to have been similar to the modern kettle drum, though perhaps smaller.
cymidine
A liquid organic base, C10H13.NH2, derived from cymene.
cynical
Having the qualities of a surly dog; snarling; captious; currish.
cymule
A small cyme, or one of very few flowers.
cymoid
Having the form of a cyme.
cymric
The Welsh language.
cynanche
Any disease of the tonsils, throat, or windpipe, attended with inflammation, swelling, and difficulty of breathing and swallowing.
cynegetics
The art of hunting with dogs.
cyperus
A large genus of plants belonging to the Sedge family, and including the species called galingale, several bulrushes, and the Egyptian papyrus.
cynoidea
A division of Carnivora, including the dogs, wolves, and foxes.
cyon
See Cion, and Scion.
cyphonism
A punishment sometimes used by the ancients, consisting in the besmearing of the criminal with honey, and exposing him to insects.
cypraea
A genus of mollusks, including the cowries. See Cowrie.
dabster
One who is skilled; a master of his business; a proficient; an adept.
cytoblast
The nucleus of a cell; the germinal or active spot of a cellule, through or in which cell development takes place.
cyrtostyle
A circular projecting portion.
cyrenaic
A native of Cyrenaica; also, a disciple of the school of Aristippus. See Cyrenian, n.
cyriologic
Relating to capital letters.
cyst
In old authors, the urinary bladder, or the gall bladder.
cytherean
Pertaining to the goddess Venus.
czech
One of the Czechs.
cytula
The fertilized egg cell or parent cell, from the development of which the child or other organism is formed.
czar
A king; a chief; the title of the emperor of Russia.
dabb
A large, spine-tailed lizard (Uromastix spinipes), found in Egypt, Arabia, and Palestine; -- called also dhobb, and dhabb.
daboia
A large and highly venomous Asiatic viper (Daboia xanthica).
dadle
To toddle; to walk unsteadily, like a child or an old man; hence, to do anything slowly or feebly.
dacian
Of or pertaining to Dacia or the Dacians.
dacapo
From the beginning; a direction to return to, and end with, the first strain; -- indicated by the letters D.
dace
A small European cyprinoid fish (Squalius leuciscus or Leuciscus vulgaris); -- called also dare.
dacoit
One of a class of robbers, in India, who act in gangs.
dactyl
A poetical foot of three sylables (-- ~ ~), one long followed by two short, or one accented followed by two unaccented; as, L.
dado
That part of a pedestal included between the base and the cornice (or surbase); the die. See Illust. of Column.
daddock
The rotten body of a tree.
dade
To hold up by leading strings or by the hand, as a child while he toddles.
daemonic
See Demon, Demonic.
daedalian
Cunningly or ingeniously formed or working; skillful; artistic; ingenious.
daff
To cast aside; to put off; to doff.
daroo
The Egyptian sycamore (Ficus Sycamorus). See Sycamore.
damourite
A kind of Muscovite, or potash mica, containing water.
dakoity
See Dacoit, Dacoity.
dahlia
A genus of plants native to Mexico and Central America, of the order Compositae; also, any plant or flower of the genus.
dago
A nickname given to a person of Spanish (or, by extension, Portuguese or Italian) descent.
dagger
A short weapon used for stabbing. This is the general term: cf. Poniard, Stiletto, Bowie knife, Dirk, Misericorde, Anlace.
daglock
A dirty or clotted lock of wool on a sheep; a taglock.
dagswain
A coarse woolen fabric made of daglocks, or the refuse of wool.
dahabeah
A Nile boat constructed on the model of a floating house, having large lateen sails.
daint
Something of exquisite taste; a dainty.
dailiness
Daily occurence.
daimio
The title of the feudal nobles of Japan.
dairy
The place, room, or house where milk is kept, and converted into butter or cheese.
dais
The high or principal table, at the end of a hall, at which the chief guests were seated; also, the chief seat at the high table.
dambonite
A white, crystalline, sugary substance obtained from an African caoutchouc.
dalmania
A genus of trilobites, of many species, common in the Upper Silurian and Devonian rocks.
dale
A low place between hills; a vale or valley.
dalliance
The act of dallying, trifling, or fondling; interchange of caresses; wanton play.
daltonian
One afflicted with color blindness.
damage
Injury or harm to person, property, or reputation; an inflicted loss of value; detriment; hurt; mischief.
dammara
An oleoresin used in making varnishes; dammar gum; dammara resin. It is obtained from certain resin trees indigenous to the East Indies, esp.
dame
A mistress of a family, who is a lady; a woman in authority; especially, a lady.
damiana
A Mexican drug, used as an aphrodisiac.
damn
To condemn; to declare guilty; to doom; to adjudge to punishment; to sentence; to censure.
damnum
Harm; detriment, either to character or property.
danseuse
A professional female dancer; a woman who dances at a public exhibition as in a ballet.
dander
Dandruff or scurf on the head.
danaite
A cobaltiferous variety of arsenopyrite.
damp
Moisture; humidity; fog; fogginess; vapor.
damsel
A young person, either male or female, of noble or gentle extraction; as, Damsel Pepin; Damsel Richard, Prince of Wales.
danburite
A borosilicate of lime, first found at Danbury, Conn. It is near the topaz in form.
dance
To move nimbly or merrily; to express pleasure by motion; to caper; to frisk; to skip about.
daniel
A Hebrew prophet distinguished for sagacity and ripeness of judgment in youth; hence, a sagacious and upright judge.
dane
A native, or a naturalized inhabitant, of Denmark.
danger
Authority; jurisdiction; control.
dank
Damp; moist; humid; wet.
dannebrog
The ancient battle standard of Denmark, bearing figures of cross and crown.
darbies
Manacles; handcuffs.
dapatical
Sumptuous in cheer.
dantean
Relating to, emanating from or resembling, the poet Dante or his writings.
danubian
Pertaining to, or bordering on, the river Danube.
daphne
A genus of diminutive Shrubs, mostly evergreen, and with fragrant blossoms.
dapper
Little and active; spruce; trim; smart; neat in dress or appearance; lively.
daric
A gold coin of ancient Persia, weighing usually a little more than 128 grains, and bearing on one side the figure of an archer.
dare
To have adequate or sufficient courage for any purpose; to be bold or venturesome; not to be afraid; to venture.
dargue
A day's work; also, a fixed amount of work, whether more or less than that of a day.
darling
One dearly beloved; a favorite.
dark
Not clear to the understanding; not easily seen through; obscure; mysterious; hidden.
darn
To mend as a rent or hole, with interlacing stitches of yarn or thread by means of a needle; to sew together with yarn or thread.
dawn
To begin to grow light in the morning; to grow light; to break, or begin to appear; as, the day dawns; the morning dawns.
datum
Something given or admitted; a fact or principle granted; that upon which an inference or an argument is based; -- used chiefly in the plural.
dastard
One who meanly shrinks from danger; an arrant coward; a poltroon.
darwinian
An advocate of Darwinism.
darr
The European black tern.
dart
A pointed missile weapon, intended to be thrown by the hand; a short lance; a javelin; hence, any sharp-pointed missile weapon, as an arrow.
dasewe
To become dim-sighted; to become dazed or dazzled.
dash
To throw with violence or haste; to cause to strike violently or hastily; -- often used with against.
date
The fruit of the date palm; also, the date palm itself.
dasypaedes
Those birds whose young are covered with down when hatched.
datable
That may be dated; having a known or ascertainable date.
datiscin
A white crystalline glucoside extracted from the bastard hemp (Datisca cannabina).
datolite
A borosilicate of lime commonly occuring in glassy,, greenish crystals.
dauw
The striped quagga, or Burchell's zebra, of South Africa (Asinus Burchellii); -- called also peechi, or peetsi.
dauk
See Dawk, v. t., to cut or gush.
daub
To smear with soft, adhesive matter, as pitch, slime, mud, etc.; to plaster; to bedaub; to besmear.
daughter
The female offspring of the human species; a female child of any age; -- applied also to the lower animals.
daun
A variant of Dan, a title of honor.
dauphin
The title of the eldest son of the king of France, and heir to the crown. Since the revolution of 1830, the title has been discontinued.
davyne
A variety of nephelite from Vesuvius.
davenport
A kind of small writing table, generally somewhat ornamental, and forming a piece of furniture for the parlor or boudoir.
davidic
Of or pertaining to David, the king and psalmist of Israel, or to his family.
dawdle
To waste time in trifling employment; to trifle; to saunter.
dawk
To cut or mark with an incision; to gash.
dead
Destitute of life; inanimate; as, dead matter.
daymare
A kind of incubus which occurs during wakefulness, attended by the peculiar pressure on the chest which characterizes nightmare.
daydream
A vain fancy speculation; a reverie; a castle in the air; unfounded hope.
dawsonite
A hydrous carbonate of alumina and soda, occuring in white, bladed crustals.
daybreak
The time of the first appearance of light in the morning.
dayflower
A genus consisting mostly of tropical perennial herbs (Commelina), having ephemeral flowers.
daylight
The light of day as opposed to the darkness of night; the light of the sun, as opposed to that of the moon or to artificial light.
daze
To stupefy with excess of light; with a blow, with cold, or with fear; to confuse; to benumb.
daysman
An umpire or arbiter; a mediator.
daytime
The time during which there is daylight, as distinguished from the night.
dazzle
To overpower with light; to confuse the sight of by brilliance of light.
deacon
An officer in Christian churches appointed to perform certain subordinate duties varying in different communions.
deave
To stun or stupefy with noise; to deafen.
dean
A dignitary or presiding officer in certain ecclesiastical and lay bodies; esp., an ecclesiastical dignitary, subordinate to a bishop.
deaf
Wanting the sense of hearing, either wholly or in part; unable to perceive sounds; hard of hearing; as, a deaf man.
deal
A part or portion; a share; hence, an indefinite quantity, degree, or extent, degree, or extent; as, a deal of time and trouble; a deal of cold.
dear
Bearing a high price; high-priced; costly; expensive.
death
The cessation of all vital phenomena without capability of resuscitation, either in animals or plants.
debilitant
Diminishing the energy of organs; reducing excitement; as, a debilitant drug.
debacchate
To rave as a bacchanal.
debeige
A kind of woolen or mixed dress goods.
debonair
Characterized by courteousness, affability, or gentleness; of good appearance and manners; graceful; complaisant.
deblai
The cavity from which the earth for parapets, etc. (remblai), is taken.
debris
Broken and detached fragments, taken collectively; especially, fragments detached from a rock or mountain, and piled up at the base.
diiodide
A compound of a binary type containing two atoms of iodine; -- called also biniodide.
derogate
To annul in part; to repeal partly; to restrict; to limit the action of; -- said of a law.
delaine
A kind of fabric for women's dresses.
defiance
The act of defying, putting in opposition, or provoking to combat; a challenge; a provocation; a summons to combat.
dedans
A division, at one end of a tennis court, for spectators.
deck
To cover; to overspread.
decease
Departure, especially departure from this life; death.
debulition
A bubbling or boiling over.
decacerata
The division of Cephalopoda which includes the squids, cuttlefishes, and others having ten arms or tentacles; -- called also Decapoda.
decharm
To free from a charm; to disenchant.
decidable
Capable of being decided; determinable.
decrease
To grow less, -- opposed to increase; to be diminished gradually, in size, degree, number, duration, etc.
declaim
To speak rhetorically; to make a formal speech or oration; to harangue; specifically, to recite a speech, poem, etc.
decoct
To prepare by boiling; to digest in hot or boiling water; to extract the strength or flavor of by boiling; to make an infusion of.
decubation
Act of lying down; decumbence.
decylic
Allied to, or containing, the radical decyl.
deem
To decide; to judge; to sentence; to condemn.
dedolent
Feeling no compunction; apathetic.
dedecorate
To bring to shame; to disgrace.
dedicate
Dedicated; set apart; devoted; consecrated.
deduce
To take away; to deduct; to subtract; as, to deduce a part from the whole.
deed
Illustrious act; achievement; exploit.
deesis
An invocation of, or address to, the Supreme Being.
deep
Extending far back from the front or outer part; of great horizontal dimension (measured backward from the front or nearer part, mouth, etc.
deer
Any animal; especially, a wild animal.
deface
To destroy; to make null.
defeasance
A defeat; an overthrow.
dehisce
To gape; to open by dehiscence.
defy
To renounce or dissolve all bonds of affiance, faith, or obligation with; to reject, refuse, or renounce.
defrauder
One who defrauds; a cheat; an embezzler; a peculator.
deflagrate
To burn with a sudden and sparkling combustion, as niter; also, to snap and crackle with slight explosions when heated, as salt.
defoliated
Deprived of leaves, as by their natural fall.
deft
Apt; fit; dexterous; clever; handy; spruce; neat.
defunct
Having finished the course of life; dead; deceased.
deglazing
The process of giving a dull or ground surface to glass by acid or by mechanical means.
degarnish
To strip or deprive of entirely, as of furniture, ornaments, etc.; to disgarnish; as, to degarnish a house, etc.
degeneracy
The act of becoming degenerate; a growing worse.
degrade
To reduce in altitude or magnitude, as hills and mountains; to wear down.
degu
A small South American rodent (Octodon Cumingii), of the family Octodontidae.
deign
To esteem worthy; to consider worth notice; -- opposed to disdain.
dehydrate
To deprive of water; to render free from water; as, to dehydrate alcohol.
dehorn
To deprive of horns; to prevent the growth of the horns of (cattle) by burning their ends soon after they start.
dehumanize
To divest of human qualities, such as pity, tenderness, etc.; as, dehumanizing influences.
deicide
The act of killing a being of a divine nature; particularly, the putting to death of Jesus Christ.
deifical
Making divine; producing a likeness to God; god-making.
deiparous
Bearing or bringing forth a god; -- said of the Virgin Mary.
deil
Devil; -- spelt also deel.
deintevous
Rare; excellent; costly.
deity
The collection of attributes which make up the nature of a god; divinity; godhead; as, the deity of the Supreme Being is seen in his works.
deism
The doctrine or creed of a deist; the belief or system of those who acknowledge the existence of one God, but deny revelation.
deject
To cast down the spirits of; to dispirit; to discourage; to dishearten.
dent
A stroke; a blow.
demicannon
A kind of ordnance, carrying a ball weighing from thirty to thirty-six pounds.
delph
The drain on the land side of a sea embankment.
delibate
To taste; to take a sip of; to dabble in.
dele
Erase; remove; -- a direction to cancel something which has been put in type; usually expressed by a peculiar form of d, thus: /.
delf
A mine; a quarry; a pit dug; a ditch.
dell
A small, retired valley; a ravine.
deloul
A special breed of the dromedary used for rapid traveling; the swift camel; -- called also herire, and maharik.
delve
To dig; to open (the ground) as with a spade.
deltaic
Relating to, or like, a delta.
deludable
Capable of being deluded; liable to be imposed on; gullible.
demagogism
The practices of a demagogue.
deme
A territorial subdivision of Attica (also of modern Greece), corresponding to a township.
denary
Containing ten; tenfold; proceeding by tens; as, the denary, or decimal, scale.
demster
An officer whose duty it was to announce the doom or sentence pronounced by the court.
demobilize
To disorganize, or disband and send home, as troops which have been mobilized.
dempne
To damn; to condemn.
demulce
To soothe; to mollify; to pacify; to soften.
demy
A printing and a writing paper of particular sizes. See under Paper.
dennet
A light, open, two-wheeled carriage for one horse; a kind of gig.
dendriform
Resembling in structure a tree or shrub.
deniable
Capable of being, or liable to be, denied.
denominate
To give a name to; to characterize by an epithet; to entitle; to name; to designate.
dense
Stupid; gross; crass; as, dense ignorance.
deplanate
Flattened; made level or even.
deoppilate
To free from obstructions; to clear a passage through.
deobstruct
To remove obstructions or impediments in; to clear from anything that hinders the passage of fluids; as, to deobstruct the pores or lacteals.
denudation
The act of stripping off covering, or removing the surface; a making bare.
deny
To declare not to be true; to gainsay; to contradict; -- opposed to affirm, allow, or admit.
deodate
A gift or offering to God.
deonerate
To unload; to disburden.
depectible
Tough; thick; capable of extension.
deoxidize
To deprive of oxygen; to reduce from the state of an oxide.
depaint
To paint; to picture; hence, to describe; to delineate in words; to depict.
dephlegm
To rid of phlegm or water; to dephlegmate.
depict
To form a colored likeness of; to represent by a picture; to paint; to portray.
derbio
A large European food fish (Lichia glauca).
depth
Profoundness; extent or degree of intensity; abundance; completeness; as, depth of knowledge, or color.
depolarize
To deprive of polarity; to reduce to an unpolarized condition.
deprave
To speak ill of; to depreciate; to malign; to revile.
depucelate
To deflour; to deprive of virginity.
deracinate
To pluck up by the roots; to extirpate.
derf
Strong; powerful; fierce.
derdoing
Doing daring or chivalrous deeds.
dere
To hurt; to harm; to injure.
derm
The integument of animal; the skin.
deride
To laugh at with contempt; to laugh to scorn; to turn to ridicule or make sport of; to mock; to scoff at.
dern
A gatepost or doorpost.
dial
An instrument, formerly much used for showing the time of day from the shadow of a style or gnomon on a graduated arc or surface; esp.
detur
A present of books given to a meritorious undergraduate student as a prize.
desquamate
To peel off in the form of scales; to scale off, as the skin in certain diseases.
deshabille
An undress; a careless toilet.
dervis
A Turkish or Persian monk, especially one who professes extreme poverty and leads an austere life.
derrick
A mast, spar, or tall frame, supported at the top by stays or guys, with suitable tackle for hoisting heavy weights, as stones in building.
derth
Dearth; scarcity.
descant
The upper voice in part music.
desecate
To cut, as with a scythe; to mow.
desman
An amphibious, insectivorous mammal found in Russia (Myogale moschata). It is allied to the moles, but is called muskrat by some English writers.
desiccant
Drying; desiccative.
desk
A table, frame, or case, usually with sloping top, but often with flat top, for the use writers and readers.
desolate
Destitute or deprived of inhabitants; deserted; uninhabited; hence, gloomy; as, a desolate isle; a desolate wilderness; a desolate house.
despair
To be hopeless; to have no hope; to give up all hope or expectation; -- often with of.
dethrone
To remove or drive from a throne; to depose; to divest of supreme authority and dignity.
desudation
A sweating; a profuse or morbid sweating, often succeeded by an eruption of small pimples.
dessert
A service of pastry, fruits, or sweetmeats, at the close of a feast or entertainment; pastry, fruits, etc.
destemper
A kind of painting. See Distemper.
detach
To separate for a special object or use; -- used especially in military language; as, to detach a ship from a fleet, or a company from a regiment.
detect
To uncover; to discover; to find out; to bring to light; as, to detect a crime or a criminal; to detect a mistake in an account.
detract
To take away; to withdraw.
detinue
A person or thing detained
detonate
To explode with a sudden report; as, niter detonates with sulphur.
detuncate
To shorten by cutting; to cut off; to lop off.
detrusion
The act of thrusting or driving down or outward; outward thrust.
dewlap
The pendulous skin under the neck of an ox, which laps or licks the dew in grazing.
devi
; fem. of Deva. A goddess.
deutoplasm
The lifeless food matter in the cytoplasm of an ovum or a cell, as distinguished from the active or true protoplasm; yolk substance; yolk.
deuce
Two; a card or a die with two spots; as, the deuce of hearts.
deused
See Deuce, Deuced.
deva
A god; a deity; a divine being; an idol; a king.
develin
The European swift.
dewclaw
In any animal, esp. of the Herbivora, a rudimentary claw or small hoof not reaching the ground.
devocalize
To make toneless; to deprive of vowel quality.
dewberry
The fruit of certain species of bramble (Rubus); in England, the fruit of R. caesius, which has a glaucous bloom; in America, that of R.
dewfall
The falling of dew; the time when dew begins to fall.
dewiness
State of being dewy.
dhurra
Indian millet. See Durra.
dexter
Pertaining to, or situated on, the right hand; right, as opposed to sinister, or left.
dewret
To ret or rot by the process called dewretting.
dewy
Pertaining to dew; resembling, consisting of, or moist with, dew.
dezincify
To deprive of, or free from, zinc.
dhony
A Ceylonese boat. See Doni.
diacaustic
Pertaining to, or possessing the properties of, a species of caustic curves formed by refraction. See Caustic surface, under Caustic.
dhow
A coasting vessel of Arabia, East Africa, and the Indian Ocean. It has generally but one mast and a lateen sail.
diabetical
Pertaining to diabetes; as, diabetic or diabetical treatment.
dieresis
The separation or resolution of one syllable into two; -- the opposite of synaeresis.
diadelphia
A Linnaean class of plants whose stamens are united into two bodies or bundles by their filaments.
diagnose
To ascertain by diagnosis; to diagnosticate. See Diagnosticate.
didelphia
The subclass of Mammalia which includes the marsupials. See Marsupialia.
dicacious
Talkative; pert; saucy.
diathermal
Freely permeable by radiant heat.
diapasm
Powdered aromatic herbs, sometimes made into little balls and strung together.
diamagnet
A body having diamagnetic polarity.
diandria
A Linnaean class of plants having two stamens.
diarchy
A form of government in which the supreme power is vested in two persons.
diastase
A soluble, nitrogenous ferment, capable of converting starch and dextrin into sugar.
dibble
A pointed implement used to make holes in the ground in which no set out plants or to plant seeds.
diazotize
To subject to such reactions or processes that diazo compounds, or their derivatives, shall be produced by chemical exchange or substitution.
dibasicity
The property or condition of being dibasic.
dibs
A sweet preparation or treacle of grape juice, much used in the East.
dibutyl
A liquid hydrocarbon, C8H18, of the marsh-gas series, being one of several octanes, and consisting of two butyl radicals.
dicoccous
Composed of two coherent, one-seeded carpels; as, a dicoccous capsule.
dicing
An ornamenting in squares or cubes.
dice
Small cubes used in gaming or in determining by chance; also, the game played with dice. See Die, n.
dichastic
Capable of subdividing spontaneously.
dickcissel
The American black-throated bunting (Spiza Americana).
diclinic
Having two of the intersections between the three axes oblique. See Crystallization.
dicyanide
A compound of a binary type containing two cyanogen groups or radicals; -- called also bicyanide.
dicrotic
Of or pertaining to dicrotism; as, a dicrotic pulse.
dictamen
A dictation or dictate.
didactical
Fitted or intended to teach; conveying instruction; preceptive; instructive; teaching some moral lesson; as, didactic essays.
diddle
To totter, as a child in walking.
diffame
Evil name; bad reputation; defamation.
didymous
Growing in pairs or twins.
didrachma
A two-drachma piece; an ancient Greek silver coin, worth nearly forty cents.
didine
Like or pertaining to the genus Didus, or the dodo.
dido
A shrewd trick; an antic; a caper.
didst
The 2d pers. sing. imp. of Do.
diducement
Diduction; separation into distinct parts.
diegesis
A narrative or history; a recital or relation.
diecious
See Dioecian, and Dioecious.
diedral
The same as Dihedral.
diesinker
An engraver of dies for stamping coins, medals, etc.
diet
Course of living or nourishment; what is eaten and drunk habitually; food; victuals; fare.
digladiate
To fight like gladiators; to contend fiercely; to dispute violently.
diggable
Capable of being dug.
digamist
One who marries a second time; a deuterogamist.
digenea
A division of Trematoda in which alternate generations occur, the immediate young not resembling their parents.
dight
To prepare; to put in order; hence, to dress, or put on; to array; to adorn.
digit
One of the terminal divisions of a limb appendage; a finger or toe.
digraph
Two signs or characters combined to express a single articulated sound; as ea in head, or th in bath.
dignation
The act of thinking worthy; honor.
digonous
Having two angles.
dihedral
Having two plane faces; as, the dihedral summit of a crystal.
digynia
A Linnaean order of plants having two styles.
diiambus
A double iambus; a foot consisting of two iambuses (/ / / /).
djinnee
See Jinnee, Jinn.
dire
Ill-boding; portentous; as, dire omens.
dinmont
A wether sheep between one and two years old.
dime
A silver coin of the United States, of the value of ten cents; the tenth of a dollar.
dilemma
An argument which presents an antagonist with two or more alternatives, but is equally conclusive against him, whichever alternative he chooses.
dike
A ditch; a channel for water made by digging.
diisatogen
A red crystalline nitrogenous substance or artificial production, which by reduction passes directly to indigo.
dijudicant
One who dijudicates.
dilacerate
To rend asunder; to tear to pieces.
dildo
A burden in popular songs.
dilogical
Ambiguous; of double meaning.
diligence
The quality of being diligent; carefulness; careful attention; -- the opposite of negligence.
dill
To still; to calm; to soothe, as one in pain.
diluent
Diluting; making thinner or weaker by admixture, esp. of water.
dimble
A bower; a dingle.
dimple
A slight natural depression or indentation on the surface of some part of the body, esp. on the cheek or chin.
dimmy
Somewhat dim; as, dimmish eyes.
dimication
A fight; contest.
dimly
In a dim or obscure manner; not brightly or clearly; with imperfect sight.
dimness
The state or quality / being dim; lack of brightness, clearness, or distinctness; dullness; obscurity.
dimorph
Either one of the two forms of a dimorphous substance; as, calcite and aragonite are dimorphs.
dine
To eat the principal regular meal of the day; to take dinner.
dimyaria
An order of lamellibranchiate mollusks having an anterior and posterior adductor muscle, as the common clam.
dinaphthyl
A colorless, crystalline hydrocarbon, C20H14, obtained from naphthylene, and consisting of a doubled naphthylene radical.
ding
To dash; to throw violently.
dink
To deck; -- often with out or up.
diota
A vase or drinking cup having two handles or ears.
dioecia
A Linnaean class of plants having the stamens and pistils on different plants.
dint
A blow; a stroke.
dinner
The principal meal of the day, eaten by most people about midday, but by many (especially in cities) at a later hour.
dinoceras
A genus of large extinct Eocene mammals from Wyoming; -- called also Uintatherium. See Illustration in Appendix.
diocesan
Of or pertaining to a diocese; as, diocesan missions.
diodon
A genus of spinose, plectognath fishes, having the teeth of each jaw united into a single beaklike plate.
diopside
A crystallized variety of pyroxene, of a clear, grayish green color; mussite.
diomedea
A genus of large sea birds, including the albatross. See Albatross.
dionaea
An insectivorous plant. See Venus's flytrap.
diorama
A mode of scenic representation, invented by Daguerre and Bouton, in which a painting is seen from a distance through a large opening.
dioscorea
A genus of plants. See Yam.
dipneumona
A group of spiders having only two lunglike organs.
dipetalous
Having two petals; two-petaled.
dioxide
An oxide containing two atoms of oxygen in each molecule; binoxide.
dipaschal
Including two passovers.
diphtheric
Relating to diphtheria; diphtheritic.
diplanar
Of or pertaining to two planes.
dipropyl
One of the hexane paraffins, found in petroleum, consisting of two propyl radicals. See Hexane.
dipody
Two metrical feet taken together, or included in one measure.
dipper
One who, or that which, dips; especially, a vessel used to dip water or other liquid; a ladle.
diptera
An extensive order of insects having only two functional wings and two balancers, as the house fly, mosquito, etc.
dipsas
A serpent whose bite was fabled to produce intense thirst.
dipyre
A mineral of the scapolite group; -- so called from the double effect of fire upon it, in fusing it, and   rendering it phosphorescent.
dissect
To analyze, for the purposes of science or criticism; to divide and examine minutely.
disgage
To free from a gage or pledge; to disengage.
disability
Want of legal qualification to do a thing; legal incapacity or incompetency.
dirk
A kind of dagger or poniard; -- formerly much used by the Scottish Highlander.
dirge
A piece of music of a mournful character, to accompany funeral rites; a funeral hymn.
dirige
A service for the dead, in the Roman Catholic Church, being the first antiphon of Matins for the dead, of which Dirige is the first word; a dirge.
dirl
To thrill; to vibrate; to penetrate.
dirt
Meanness; sordidness.
disdain
A feeling of contempt and aversion; the regarding anything as unworthy of or beneath one; scorn.
disband
To become separated, broken up, dissolved, or scattered; especially, to quit military service by breaking up organization.
disc
A flat round plate
disease
Lack of ease; uneasiness; trouble; vexation; disquiet.
disfavor
Want of favor of favorable regard; disesteem; disregard.
dismail
To divest of coat of mail.
disjection
Destruction; dispersion.
dish
A vessel, as a platter, a plate, a bowl, used for serving up food at the table.
disimpark
To free from the barriers or restrictions of a park.
disk
A discus; a quoit.
disleal
Disloyal; perfidious.
dispair
To separate (a pair).
disnatured
Deprived or destitute of natural feelings; unnatural.
disobey
To refuse or neglect to obey; to violate commands; to be disobedient.
disquiet
Deprived of quiet; impatient; restless; uneasy.
disrank
To degrade from rank.
ditrochean
Containing two trochees.
ditation
The act of making rich; enrichment.
disvalue
To undervalue; to depreciate.
distad
Toward a distal part; on the distal side of; distally.
disulphate
A salt of disulphuric or pyrosulphuric acid; a pyrosulphate.
diswarn
To dissuade from by previous warning.
disyoke
To unyoke; to free from a yoke; to disjoin.
dithecous
Having two thecae, cells, or compartments.
ditch
Any long, narrow receptacle for water on the surface of the earth.
dite
To prepare for action or use; to make ready; to dight.
ditionary
Under rule; subject; tributary.
ditokous
Having two kinds of young, as certain annelids.
dividable
Capable of being divided; divisible.
diuturnal
Of long continuance; lasting.
dittander
A kind of peppergrass (Lepidium latifolium).
diureide
One of a series of complex nitrogenous substances regarded as containing two molecules of urea or their radicals, as uric acid or allantoin.
divagation
A wandering about or going astray; digression.
dive
To plunge into water head foremost; to thrust the body under, or deeply into, water or other fluid.
dixie
A colloquial name for the Southern portion of the United States, esp. during the Civil War.
divorce
The separation of a married woman from the bed and board of her husband -- divorce a mensa et toro (/ thoro), "from bed board.
divulge
To indicate publicly; to proclaim.
dizz
To make dizzy; to astonish; to puzzle.
dizen
To dress; to attire.
djerrid
A blunt javelin used in military games in Moslem countries.
domable
Capable of being tamed; tamable.
dogday
One of the dog days.
doddart
A game much like hockey, played in an open field; also, the, bent stick for playing the game.
dochmiac
Pertaining to, or containing, the dochmius.
dobson
The aquatic larva of a large neuropterous insect (Corydalus cornutus), used as bait in angling. See Hellgamite.
doab
A tongue or tract of land included between two rivers; as, the doab between the Ganges and the Jumna.
dobber
A float to a fishing line.
dobule
The European dace.
docent
Serving to instruct; teaching.
docoglossa
An order of gastropods, including the true limpets, and having the teeth on the odontophore or lingual ribbon.
docible
Easily taught or managed; teachable.
dock
A genus of plants (Rumex), some species of which are well-known weeds which have a long taproot and are difficult of extermination.
doctor
A teacher; one skilled in a profession, or branch of knowledge learned man.
document
That which is taught or authoritatively set forth; precept; instruction; dogma.
doeglic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, the doegling; as, doeglic acid (Chem.), an oily substance resembling oleic acid.
dodipoll
A stupid person; a fool; a blockhead.
dodecagon
A figure or polygon bounded by twelve sides and containing twelve angles.
dodge
To start suddenly aside, as to avoid a blow or a missile; to shift place by a sudden start.
dodkin
A doit; a small coin.
dodman
A snail; also, a snail shell; a hodmandod.
doff
To put off, as dress; to divest one's self of; hence, figuratively, to put or thrust away; to rid one's self of.
doer
One who does; one performs or executes; one who is wont and ready to act; an actor; an agent.
does
The 3d pers. sing. pres. of Do.
dogal
Of or pertaining to a doge.
dogbane
A small genus of perennial herbaceous plants, with poisonous milky juice, bearing slender pods pods in pairs.
doit
A small Dutch coin, worth about half a farthing; also, a similar small coin once used in Scotland; hence, any small piece of money.
dogship
The character, or individuality, of a dog.
dogged
Sullenly obstinate; obstinately determined or persistent; as, dogged resolution; dogged work.
doge
The chief magistrate in the republics of Venice and Genoa.
dogfish
A small shark, of many species, of the genera Mustelus, Scyllium, Spinax, etc.
doghole
A place fit only for dogs; a vile, mean habitation or apartment.
dogma
That which is held as an opinion; a tenet; a doctrine.
dogwatch
A half watch; a watch of two hours, of which there are two, the first dogwatch from 4 to 6 o'clock, p.
dogtooth
See Canine tooth, under Canine.
dogvane
A small vane of bunting, feathers, or any other light material, carried at the masthead to indicate the direction of the wind.
doily
A kind of woolen stuff.
doing
Anything done; a deed; an action good or bad; hence, in the plural, conduct; behavior. See Do.
dolioform
Barrel-shaped, or like a cask in form.
dolcemente
Softly; sweetly; with soft, smooth, and delicate execution.
doko
See Lepidosiren.
dolabra
A rude ancient ax or hatchet, seen in museums.
dulcino
A small bassoon, formerly much used.
dole
Grief; sorrow; lamentation.
dolomitic
Pertaining to dolomite.
doll
A child's puppet; a toy baby for a little girl.
dolman
A long robe or outer garment, with long sleeves, worn by the Turks.
dolt
A heavy, stupid fellow; a blockhead; a numskull; an ignoramus; a dunce; a dullard.
dolphin
A cetacean of the genus Delphinus and allied genera (esp. D. delphis); the true dolphin.
dolus
Evil intent, embracing both malice and fraud. See Culpa.
dormancy
The state of being dormant; quiescence; abeyance.
donzel
A young squire, or knight's attendant; a page.
doni
A clumsy craft, having one mast with a long sail, used for trading purposes on the coasts of Coromandel and Ceylon.
donable
Capable of being donated or given.
dome
A building; a house; an edifice; -- used chiefly in poetry.
domical
Relating to, or shaped like, a dome.
doncella
A handsome fish of Florida and the West Indies (Platyglossus radiatus). The name is applied also to the ladyfish (Harpe rufa) of the same region.
done
P. p. from Do, and formerly the infinitive.
donna
A lady; madam; mistress; -- the title given a lady in Italy.
donjon
The chief tower, also called the keep; a massive tower in ancient castles, forming the strongest part of the fortifications.
donkey
An ass; or (less frequently) a mule.
donor
One who gives or bestows; one who confers anything gratuitously; a benefactor.
donship
The quality or rank of a don, gentleman, or knight.
dopper
An Anabaptist or Baptist.
doom
Judgment; judicial sentence; penal decree; condemnation.
doodle
A trifler; a simple fellow.
dooly
A kind of litter suspended from men's shoulders, for carrying persons or things; a palanquin.
door
An opening in the wall of a house or of an apartment, by which to go in and out; an entrance way.
doop
A little copper cup in which a diamond is held while being cut.
doree
A European marine fish (Zeus faber), of a yellow color. See Illust. of John Doree.
doquet
A warrant. See Docket.
dorado
A southern constellation, within which is the south pole of the ecliptic; -- called also sometimes Xiphias, or the Swordfish.
dorhawk
The European goatsucker; -- so called because it eats the dor beetle. See Goatsucker.
dorian
Of or pertaining to the ancient Greeks of Doris; Doric; as, a Dorian fashion.
douanier
An officer of the French customs.
dosser
A pannier, or basket.
dorsad
Toward the dorsum or back; on the dorsal side; dorsally.
dorn
A British ray; the thornback.
dorr
The dorbeetle; also, a drone or an idler. See 1st Dor.
dory
A European fish. See Doree, and John Doree.
dose
The quantity of medicine given, or prescribed to be taken, at one time.
doting
That dotes; silly; excessively fond.
dotage
Foolish utterance; drivel.
dote
A marriage portion. [Obs.] See 1st Dot, n.
dottard
An old, decayed tree.
doty
Half-rotten; as, doty timber.
doulocracy
A government by slaves.
dowset
A dowcet, or deep's testicle.
double
Twofold; multiplied by two; increased by its equivalent; made twice as large or as much, etc.
douc
A monkey (Semnopithecus nemaeus), remarkable for its varied and brilliant colors. It is a native of Cochin China.
douceur
Gentleness and sweetness of manner; agreeableness.
dough
Paste of bread; a soft mass of moistened flour or meal, kneaded or unkneaded, but not yet baked; as, to knead dough.
douse
To plunge suddenly into water; to duck; to immerse; to dowse.
doupe
The carrion crow.
dour
Hard; inflexible; obstinate; sour in aspect; hardy; bold.
dove
A pigeon of the genus Columba and various related genera. The species are numerous.
douter
An extinguisher for candles.
dovish
Like a dove; harmless; innocent.
genu
The kneelike bend, in the anterior part of the callosum of the brain.
exfetation
Imperfect fetation in some organ exterior to the uterus; extra-uterine fetation.
emetic
Inducing to vomit; exciting the stomach to discharge its contents by the mouth.
easily
With ease; without difficulty or much effort; as, this task may be easily performed; that event might have been easily foreseen.
dufrenite
A mineral of a blackish green color, commonly massive or in nodules. It is a hydrous phosphate of iron.
drizzle
To rain slightly in very small drops; to fall, as water from the clouds, slowly and in fine particles; as, it drizzles; drizzling drops or rain.
drastic
Acting rapidly and violently; efficacious; powerful; -- opposed to bland; as, drastic purgatives.
doziness
The state of being dozy; drowsiness; inclination to sleep.
down
Fine, soft, hairy outgrowth from the skin or surface of animals or plants, not matted and fleecy like wool
dowel
A piece of wood driven into a wall, so that other pieces may be nailed to it.
dowcet
One of the testicles of a hart or stag.
dowdy
Showing a vulgar taste in dress; awkward and slovenly in dress; vulgar-looking.
dowitcher
The red-breasted or gray snipe (Macrorhamphus griseus); -- called also brownback, and grayback.
dowlas
A coarse linen cloth made in the north of England and in Scotland, now nearly replaced by calico.
doxologize
To give glory to God, as in a doxology; to praise God with doxologies.
dowral
Of or relating to a dower.
dowse
To plunge, or duck into water; to immerse; to douse.
doxy
A loose wench; a disreputable sweetheart.
doze
To slumber; to sleep lightly; to be in a dull or stupefied condition, as if half asleep; to be drowsy.
drag
A confection; a comfit; a drug.
dracaena
A genus of liliaceous plants with woody stems and funnel-shaped flowers.
dozy
Drowsy; inclined to doze; sleepy; sluggish; as, a dozy head.
drab
A low, sluttish woman.
dradge
Inferior ore, separated from the better by cobbing.
draff
Refuse; lees; dregs; the wash given to swine or cows; hogwash; waste matter.
dram
A weight; in Apothecaries' weight, one eighth part of an ounce, or sixty grains; in Avoirdupois weight, one sixteenth part of an ounce, or 27.
drail
To trail; to draggle.
drake
The male of the duck kind.
drank
Wild oats, or darnel grass. See Drake a plant.
drape
To cover or adorn with drapery or folds of cloth, or as with drapery; as, to drape a bust, a building, etc.
drench
To cause to drink; especially, to dose by force; to put a potion down the throat of, as of a horse; hence.
dread
To fear in a great degree; to regard, or look forward to, with terrific apprehension.
draw
To cause to move continuously by force applied in advance of the thing moved; to pull along; to haul; to drag; to cause to follow.
draught
The act of drawing or pulling
drave
Old imp. of Drive.
dray
A squirrel's nest.
drazel
A slut; a vagabond wench. Same as Drossel.
dree
To endure; to suffer.
drecche
To vex; to torment; to trouble.
dredge
Any instrument used to gather or take by dragging; as: (a) A dragnet for taking up oysters, etc., from their beds.
dregginess
Fullness of dregs or lees; foulness; feculence.
dreint
P. p. of Drench to drown.
drift
A driving; a violent movement.
drey
A squirrel's nest. See Dray.
dress
To direct; to put right or straight; to regulate; to order.
drevil
A fool; a drudge. See Drivel.
drib
To do by little and little
dried
Of Day. Also adj.; as, dried apples.
drink
To swallow (a liquid); to receive, as a fluid, into the stomach; to imbibe; as, to drink milk or water.
drill
To pierce or bore with a drill, or a with a drill; to perforate; as, to drill a hole into a rock; to drill a piece of metal.
drimys
A genus of magnoliaceous trees. Drimys aromatica furnishes Winter's bark.
drip
To fall in drops; as, water drips from the eaves.
drive
To carry or; to keep in motion; to conduct; to prosecute.
drying
Adapted or tending to exhaust moisture; as, a drying wind or day; a drying room.
drub
To beat with a stick; to thrash; to cudgel.
drool
To drivel, or drop saliva; as, the child drools.
droll
Queer, and fitted to provoke laughter; ludicrous from oddity; amusing and strange.
drogue
See Drag, n., 6, and Drag sail, under Drag, n.
droil
To work sluggishly or slowly; to plod.
drome
The crab plover (Dromas ardeola), a peculiar North African bird, allied to the oyster catcher.
drone
The male of bees, esp. of the honeybee. It gathers no honey. See Honeybee.
drought
Dryness; want of rain or of water; especially, such dryness of the weather as affects the earth, and prevents the growth of plants; aridity.
drop
Any small pendent ornament.
drosera
A genus of low perennial or biennial plants, the leaves of which are beset with gland-tipped bristles.
drove
A collection of cattle driven, or cattle collected for driving; a number of animals, as oxen, sheep, or swine, driven in a body.
drown
To be suffocated in water or other fluid; to perish in water.
drunk
Drenched or saturated with moisture or liquid.
drug
To drudge; to toil laboriously.
drudge
To perform menial work; to labor in mean or unpleasant offices with toil and fatigue.
druery
Courtship; gallantry; love; an object of love.
druid
One of an order of priests which in ancient times existed among certain branches of the Celtic race, especially among the Gauls and Britons.
drum
Anything resembling a drum in form
druxy
Having decayed spots or streaks of a whitish color; -- said of timber.
drupaceous
Producing, or pertaining to, drupes; having the form of drupes; as, drupaceous trees or fruits.
druse
A cavity in a rock, having its interior surface studded with crystals and sometimes filled with water; a geode.
dryad
A wood nymph; a nymph whose life was bound up with that of her tree.
dryfoot
The scent of the game, as far as it can be traced.
duchess
The wife or widow of a duke; also, a lady who has the sovereignty of a duchy in her own right.
duan
A division of a poem corresponding to a canto; a poem or song.
drysaltery
The articles kept by a drysalter; also, the business of a drysalter.
dryly
In a dry manner; not succulently; without interest; without sympathy; coldly.
dryness
The state of being dry. See Dry.
duad
A union of two; duality.
dual
Expressing, or consisting of, the number two; belonging to two; as, the dual number of nouns, etc. , in Greek.
dubiety
Doubtfulness; uncertainty; doubt.
duarchy
Government by two persons.
dubb
The Syrian bear. See under Bear.
duboisine
An alkaloid obtained from the leaves of an Australian tree (Duboisia myoporoides), and regarded as identical with hyoscyamine.
ducal
Of or pertaining to a duke.
dudish
Like, or characterized of, a dude.
dudder
To confuse or confound with noise.
duck
A pet; a darling.
duct
Any tube or canal by which a fluid or other substance is conducted or conveyed.
dude
A kind of dandy; especially, one characterized by an ultrafashionable style of dress and other affectations.
dudgeon
The root of the box tree, of which hafts for daggers were made.
duel
To fight in single combat.
duds
Old or inferior clothes; tattered garments.
duebill
A brief written acknowledgment of a debt, not made payable to order, like a promissory note.
duet
A composition for two performers, whether vocal or instrumental.
dueness
Quality of being due; debt; what is due or becoming.
duff
A stiff flour pudding, boiled in a bag; -- a term used especially by seamen; as, plum duff.
duumvir
One of two Roman officers or magistrates united in the same public functions.
dunner
One employed in soliciting the payment of debts.
dumb
Destitute of the power of speech; unable; to utter articulate sounds; as, the dumb brutes.
dulia
An inferior kind of veneration or worship, given to the angels and saints as the servants of God.
duke
A leader; a chief; a prince.
dugong
An aquatic herbivorous mammal (Halicore dugong), of the order Sirenia, allied to the manatee, but with a bilobed tail.
dugway
A way or road dug through a hill, or sunk below the surface of the land.
dulcamara
A plant (Solanum Dulcamara). See Bittersweet, n., 3 (a).
duledge
One of the dowels joining the ends of the fellies which form the circle of the wheel of a gun carriage.
dulwilly
The ring plover.
dull
Slow of understanding; wanting readiness of apprehension; stupid; doltish; blockish.
dulse
A seaweed of a reddish brown color, which is sometimes eaten, as in Scotland. The true dulse is Sarcophyllis edulis; the common is Rhodymenia.
duly
In a due, fit, or becoming manner; as it (anything) ought to be; properly; regularly.
dumal
Pertaining to, or set with, briers or bushes; brambly.
dunce
One backward in book learning; a child or other person dull or weak in intellect; a dullard; a dolt.
dumous
Abounding with bushes and briers.
dumfound
To strike dumb; to confuse with astonishment.
dummerer
One who feigns dumbness.
dump
A thick, ill-shapen piece; a clumsy leaden counter used by boys in playing chuck farthing.
dunbird
The pochard; -- called also dunair, and dunker, or dun-curre.
dunfish
Codfish cured in a particular manner, so as to be of a superior quality.
dunder
The lees or dregs of cane juice, used in the distillation of rum.
dune
A low hill of drifting sand usually formed on the coats, but often carried far inland by the prevailing winds.
dung
The excrement of an animal.
dunlin
A species of sandpiper (Tringa alpina); -- called also churr, dorbie, grass bird, and red-backed sandpiper.
durham
One or a breed of short-horned cattle, originating in the county of Durham, England. The Durham cattle are noted for their beef-producing quality.
dupe
One who has been deceived or who is easily deceived; a gull; as, the dupe of a schemer.
duoliteral
Consisting of two letters only; biliteral.
dunted
Beaten; hence, blunted.
duodecimal
Proceeding in computation by twelves; expressed in the scale of twelves.
duomo
A cathedral. See Dome, 2.
dupable
Capable of being duped.
dura
Short form for Dura mater.
dupion
A double cocoon, made by two silkworms.
duplex
Double; twofold.
durbar
An audience hall; the court of a native prince; a state levee; a formal reception of native princes, given by the governor general of India.
dure
Hard; harsh; severe; rough; toilsome.
duse
A demon or spirit. See Deuce.
durst
Of Dare. See Dare, v. i.
during
In the time of; as long as the action or existence of; as, during life; during the space of a year.
durometer
An instrument for measuring the degree of hardness; especially, an instrument for testing the relative hardness of steel rails and the like.
durukuli
A small, nocturnal, South American monkey (Nyctipthecus trivirgatus).
durylic
Pertaining to, allied to, or derived from, durene; as, durylic acid.
dutch
Pertaining to Holland, or to its inhabitants.
dusk
Tending to darkness or blackness; moderately dark or black; dusky.
dust
A single particle of earth or other matter.
dutiable
Subject to the payment of a duty; as dutiable goods.
duteous
Subservient; obsequious.
duty
That which is due; payment.
dysodile
An impure earthy or coaly bitumen, which emits a highly fetid odor when burning.
dyehouse
A building in which dyeing is carried on.
dwaule
To be delirious.
dwale
The deadly nightshade (Atropa Belladonna), having stupefying qualities.
duykerbok
A small South African antelope (Cephalous mergens); -- called also impoon, and deloo.
dvergr
A dwarf supposed to dwell in rocks and hills and to be skillful in working metals.
dwang
A piece of wood set between two studs, posts, etc., to stiffen and support them.
dwarf
An animal or plant which is much below the ordinary size of its species or kind; especially, a diminutive human being.
dyad
Two units treated as one; a couple; a pair.
dwell
To delay; to linger.
dwindle
To diminish; to become less; to shrink; to waste or consume away; to become degenerate; to fall away.
dyaks
The aboriginal and most numerous inhabitants of Borneo. They are partially civilized, but retain many barbarous practices.
dyas
A name applied in Germany to the Permian formation, there consisting of two principal groups.
dyke
See Dike. The spelling dyke is restricted by some to the geological meaning.
dyestuff
A material used for dyeing.
dyeing
The process or art of fixing coloring matters permanently and uniformly in the fibers of wool, cotton, etc.
dyer
One whose occupation is to dye cloth and the like.
dyewood
Any wood from which coloring matter is extracted for dyeing.
dying
In the act of dying; destined to death; mortal; perishable; as, dying bodies.
dysgenesic
Not procreating or breeding freely; as, one race may be dysgenesic with respect to another.
dynam
A unit of measure for dynamical effect or work; a foot pound. See Foot pound.
dyscrasia
An ill habit or state of the constitution; -- formerly regarded as dependent on a morbid condition of the blood and humors.
dysluite
A variety of the zinc spinel or gahnite.
dysnomy
Bad legislation; the enactment of bad laws.
earcap
A cap or cover to protect the ear from cold.
each
Every one of the two or more individuals composing a number of objects, considered separately from the rest.
dysury
Difficult or painful discharge of urine.
dyspeptic
A person afflicted with dyspepsia.
dystocia
Difficult delivery pr parturition.
dzeron
The Chinese yellow antelope (Procapra gutturosa), a remarkably swift-footed animal, inhabiting the deserts of Central Asia, Thibet, and China.
dziggetai
The kiang, a wild horse or wild ass of Thibet (Asinus hemionus).
eagre
A wave, or two or three successive waves, of great height and violence, at flood tide moving up an estuary or river; -- commonly called the bore.
eager
Sharp; sour; acid.
eagle
A gold coin of the United States, of the value of ten dollars.
eanling
A lamb just brought forth; a yeanling.
earable
Arable; tillable.
earn
To merit or deserve, as by labor or service; to do that which entitles one to (a reward, whether the reward is received or not).
eariness
Fear or timidity, especially of something supernatural.
eardrop
A pendant for the ear; an earring; as, a pair of eardrops.
eared
Having (such or so many) ears; -- used in composition; as, long-eared-eared; sharp-eared; full-eared; ten-eared.
earlap
The lobe of the ear.
earmark
A mark on the ear of sheep, oxen, dogs, etc., as by cropping or slitting.
earshot
Reach of the ear; distance at which words may be heard.
earpick
An instrument for removing wax from the ear.
earring
An ornament consisting of a ring passed through the lobe of the ear, with or without a pendant.
earwig
Any insect of the genus Forticula and related genera, belonging to the order Euplexoptera.
earth
The solid materials which make up the globe, in distinction from the air or water; the dry land.
ease
Satisfaction; pleasure; hence, accommodation; entertainment.
egotheism
The deification of self.
edder
An adder or serpent.
echelon
An arrangement of a fleet in a wedge or V formation.
ebulliate
To boil or bubble up.
eavedrop
A drop from the eaves; eavesdrop.
eatable
Capable of being eaten; fit to be eaten; proper for food; esculent; edible.
east
To move toward the east; to veer from the north or south toward the east; to orientate.
easy
At ease; free from pain, trouble, or constraint
eater
One who, or that which, eats.
eating
The act of tasking food; the act of consuming or corroding.
eblis
The prince of the evil spirits; Satan.
ebionite
One of a sect of heretics, in the first centuries of the church, whose doctrine was a mixture of Judaism and Christianity.
eblanin
See Pyroxanthin.
ebon
Consisting of ebony.
ebriety
Drunkenness; intoxication by spirituous liquors; inebriety.
eccentric
Pertaining to an eccentric; as, the eccentric rod in a steam engine.
ecaudate
Without a tail or spur.
eburin
A composition of dust of ivory or of bone with a cement; -- used for imitations of valuable stones and in making moldings, seals, etc.
ecardines
An order of Brachiopoda; the Lyopomata. See Brachiopoda.
ecballium
A genus of cucurbitaceous plants consisting of the single species Ecballium agreste (or Elaterium), the squirting cucumber.
ecbole
A digression in which a person is introduced speaking his own words.
eccritic
A remedy which promotes discharges, as an emetic, or a cathartic.
ecchymosis
A livid or black and blue spot, produced by the extravasation or effusion of blood into the areolar tissue from a contusion.
eccle
The European green woodpecker; -- also called ecall, eaquall, yaffle.
ecdysis
The act of shedding, or casting off, an outer cuticular layer, as in the case of serpents, lobsters, etc.
ecgonine
A colorless, crystalline, nitrogenous base, obtained by the decomposition of cocaine.
ecrasement
The operation performed with an ecraseur.
eclogite
A rock consisting of granular red garnet, light green smaragdite, and common hornblende; -- so called in reference to its beauty.
eclair
A kind of frosted cake, containing flavored cream.
echidna
A monster, half maid and half serpent.
echo
A sound reflected from an opposing surface and repeated to the ear of a listener; repercussion of sound; repetition of a sound.
eclectic
Selecting; choosing (what is true or excellent in doctrines, opinions, etc.) from various sources or systems; as, an eclectic philosopher.
eclipse
The loss, usually temporary or partial, of light, brilliancy, luster, honor, consciousness, etc.; obscuration; gloom; darkness.
ecossaise
A dancing tune in the Scotch style.
economical
Pertaining to the household; domestic.
ecorche
A manikin, or image, representing an animal, especially man, with the skin removed so that the muscles are exposed for purposes of study.
ecoute
One of the small galleries run out in front of the glacis. They serve to annoy the enemy's miners.
ecphasis
An explicit declaration.
ectoblast
The outer layer of the blastoderm; the epiblast; the ectoderm.
ectad
Toward the outside or surface; -- opposed to entad.
ecru
Having the color or appearance of unbleached stuff, as silk, linen, or the like.
ecstasy
Excessive and overmastering joy or enthusiasm; rapture; enthusiastic delight.
ecteron
The external layer of the skin and mucous membranes; epithelium; ecderon.
ecthlipsis
The dropping out or suppression from a word of a consonant, with or without a vowel.
ecumenical
General; universal; in ecclesiastical usage, that which concerns the whole church; as, an ecumenical council.
ectropion
An unnatural eversion of the eyelids.
ectypal
Copied, reproduced as a molding or cast, in contradistinction from the original model.
edacious
Given to eating; voracious; devouring.
eczematous
Pertaining to eczema; having the characteristic of eczema.
eddic
Relating to the Eddas; resembling the Eddas.
effable
Capable of being uttered or explained; utterable.
edileship
The office of aedile.
edge
Any sharp terminating border; a margin; a brink; extreme verge; as, the edge of a table, a precipice.
eddy
A current of air or water running back, or in a direction contrary to the main current.
eddish
Aftermath; also, stubble and stubble field. See Arrish.
eddoes
The tubers of Colocasia antiquorum. See Taro.
edelweiss
A little, perennial, white, woolly plant (Leontopodium alpinum), growing at high elevations in the Alps.
eden
The garden where Adam and Eve first dwelt; hence, a delightful region or residence.
edibility
Suitableness for being eaten; edibleness.
edging
That which forms an edge or border, as the fringe, trimming, etc., of a garment, or a border in a garden.
edgy
Easily irritated; sharp; as, an edgy temper.
edictal
Relating to, or consisting of, edicts; as, the Roman edictal law.
edificant
Building; constructing.
eelfare
A brood of eels.
educable
Capable of being educated.
edit
To superintend the publication of; to revise and prepare for publication; to select, correct, arrange, etc.
edomite
One of the descendants of Esau or Edom, the brother of Jacob; an Idumean.
edulcorant
Having a tendency to purify or to sweeten by removing or correcting acidity and acrimony.
eelbuck
An eelpot or eel basket.
eelspear
A spear with barbed forks for spearing eels.
eelgrass
A plant (Zostera marina), with very long and narrow leaves, growing abundantly in shallow bays along the North Atlantic coast.
eelpot
A boxlike structure with funnel-shaped traps for catching eels; an eelbuck.
eery
Serving to inspire fear, esp. a dread of seeing ghosts; wild; weird; as, eerie stories.
eerily
In a strange, unearthly way.
egesta
That which is egested or thrown off from the body by the various excretory channels; excrements; -- opposed to ingesta.
effulge
To cause to shine with abundance of light; to radiate; to beam.
efflate
To fill with breath; to puff up.
effect
Execution; performance; realization; operation; as, the law goes into effect in May.
efficiency
The quality of being efficient or producing an effect or effects; efficient power; effectual agency.
efforce
To force; to constrain; to compel to yield.
effray
To frighten; to scare.
egal
Equal; impartial.
eftsoons
Again; anew; a second time; at once; speedily.
egad
An exclamation expressing exultation or surprise, etc.
egence
The state of needing, or of suffering a natural want.
eger
An impetuous flood; a bore. See Eagre.
eggshell
The shell or exterior covering of an egg. Also used figuratively for anything resembling an eggshell.
egghot
A kind of posset made of eggs, brandy, sugar, and ale.
eggar
Any bombycid moth of the genera Eriogaster and Lasiocampa; as, the oak eggar (L. roboris) of Europe.
eggement
Instigation; incitement.
eggler
One who gathers, or deals in, eggs.
eggnog
A drink consisting of eggs beaten up with sugar, milk, and (usually) wine or spirits.
egling
The European perch when two years old.
egilopical
Pertaining to, of the nature of, or affected with, an aegilops, or tumor in the corner of the eye.
eglantine
A species of rose (Rosa Eglanteria), with fragrant foliage and flowers of various colors.
egoical
Pertaining to egoism.
eglomerate
To unwind, as a thread from a ball.
egophonic
Belonging to, or resembling, egophony.
elimate
To render smooth; to polish.
elamite
A dweller in Flam (or Susiana), an ancient kingdom of Southwestern Asia, afterwards a province of Persia.
eisel
Vinegar; verjuice.
eidograph
An instrument for copying drawings on the same or a different scale; a form of the pantograph.
egrimony
The herb agrimony.
egranulose
Having no granules, as chlorophyll in certain conditions.
egre
See Eager, and Eagre.
egyptian
Pertaining to Egypt, in Africa.
ehlite
A mineral of a green color and pearly luster; a hydrous phosphate of copper.
eikon
An image or effigy; -- used rather in an abstract sense, and rarely for a work of art.
eigh
An exclamation expressing delight.
eigne
Eldest; firstborn.
eirenarch
A justice of the peace; irenarch.
eirie
See Aerie, and Eyrie.
ekebergite
A variety of scapolite.
eject
To cast out; to evict; to dispossess; as, to eject tenants from an estate.
either
One of two; the one or the other; -- properly used of two things, but sometimes of a larger number, for any one.
ejaculate
To throw out suddenly and swiftly, as if a dart; to dart; to eject.
ejoo
Gomuti fiber. See Gomuti.
ejulation
A wailing; lamentation.
elaborate
To produce with labor
ekename
An additional or epithet name; a nickname.
eking
A lengthening or filling piece to make good a deficiency in length.
elaeagnus
A genus of shrubs or small trees, having the foliage covered with small silvery scales; oleaster.
elaidate
A salt of elaidic acid.
elecampane
A sweetmeat made from the root of the plant.
elbow
The joint or bend of the arm; the outer curve in the middle of the arm when bent.
elasipoda
An order of holothurians mostly found in the deep sea. They are remarkable for their bilateral symmetry and curious forms.
elan
Ardor inspired by passion or enthusiasm.
elaphine
Pertaining to, resembling, or characteristic of, the stag, or Cervus elaphus.
elate
Lifted up; raised; elevated.
elayl
Olefiant gas or ethylene; -- so called by Berzelius from its forming an oil combining with chlorine. [Written also elayle.
elder
Older; more aged, or existing longer.
elcaja
An Arabian tree (Trichilia emetica). The fruit, which is emetic, is sometimes employed in the composition of an ointment for the cure of the itch.
elcesaite
One of a sect of Asiatic Gnostics of the time of the Emperor Trajan.
eldritch
Hideous; ghastly; as, an eldritch shriek or laugh.
eleatic
A philosopher of the Eleatic school.
eleusinian
Pertaining to Eleusis, in Greece, or to secret rites in honor of Ceres, there celebrated; as, Eleusinian mysteries or festivals.
element
One of the smallest natural divisions of the organism, as a blood corpuscle, a muscular fiber.
elegancy
That which is elegant; that which is tasteful and highly attractive.
eleidin
Lifeless matter deposited in the form of minute granules within the protoplasm of living cells.
elench
That part of an argument on which its conclusiveness depends; that which convinces of refutes an antagonist; a refutation.
elephant
A mammal of the order Proboscidia, of which two living species, Elephas Indicus and E. Africanus, and several fossil species, are known.
elflock
Hair matted, or twisted into a knot, as if by elves.
elevate
Elevated; raised aloft.
elfin
Relating to elves.
elide
To break or dash in pieces; to demolish; as, to elide the force of an argument.
elicit
Elicited; drawn out; made real; open; evident.
eligible
That may be selected; proper or qualified to be chosen; legally qualified to be elected and to hold office.
else
Other; one or something beside; as, Who else is coming? What else shall I give? Do you expect anything else?
ellwand
Formerly, a measuring rod an ell long.
elke
The European wild or whistling swan (Cygnus ferus).
elison
Division; separation.
elinguate
To deprive of the tongue.
eliquament
A liquid obtained from fat, or fat fish, by pressure.
elite
A choice or select body; the flower; as, the elite of society.
elixate
To boil; to seethe; hence, to extract by boiling or seething.
ellachick
A fresh-water tortoise (Chelopus marmoratus) of California; -- used as food.
elknut
The buffalo nut. See under Buffalo.
elkwood
The soft, spongy wood of a species of Magnolia (M. Umbrella).
elleck
The red gurnard or cuckoo fish.
ellipse
Omission. See Ellipsis.
elohim
One of the principal names by which God is designated in the Hebrew Scriptures.
elocation
A removal from the usual place of residence.
elmen
Belonging to elms.
elmy
Abounding with elms.
elodian
One of a tribe of tortoises, including the terrapins, etc., in which the head and neck can be withdrawn.
eloge
A panegyrical funeral oration.
elopement
The act of eloping; secret departure; -- said of a woman and a man, one or both, who run away from their homes for marriage or for cohabitation.
eloign
To remove afar off; to withdraw.
elong
To lengthen out; to prolong.
eloquence
Fig.: Whatever produces the effect of moving and persuasive speech.
elritch
Ghastly; preternatural. Same as Eldritch.
emacerate
To make lean or to become lean; to emaciate.
eluxate
To dislocate; to luxate.
eludible
Capable of being eluded; evadible.
elsin
A shoemaker's awl.
elucidate
To make clear or manifest; to render more intelligible; to illustrate; as, an example will elucidate the subject.
elumbated
Weak or lame in the loins.
elusion
Act of eluding; adroit escape, as by artifice; a mockery; a cheat; trickery.
elvish
Pertaining to elves; implike; mischievous; weird; also, vacant; absent in demeanor. See Elfish.
elvan
Pertaining to elves; elvish.
elve
An old form of Elf.
elysian
Pertaining, or the abode of the blessed after death; hence, yielding the highest pleasures; exceedingly delightful; beatific.
elytriform
Having the form, or structure, of an elytron.
embillow
To swell or heave like a ///// of the sea.
emasculate
To deprive of virile or procreative power; to castrate power; to castrate; to geld.
emanate
To issue forth from a source; to flow out from more or less constantly; as, fragrance emanates from flowers.
emarginate
To take away the margin of.
embale
To make up into a bale or pack.
embeam
To make brilliant with beams.
embrace
To fasten on, as armor.
emblanch
To whiten. See Blanch.
embodier
One who embodies.
emenagogue
See Emmenagogue.
embulk
To enlarge in the way of bulk.
emerald
A precious stone of a rich green color, a variety of beryl. See Beryl.
equability
The quality or condition of being equable; evenness or uniformity; as, equability of temperature; the equability of the mind.
enomotarch
The commander of an enomoty.
endear
To make dear or beloved.
empyema
A collection of blood, pus, or other fluid, in some cavity of the body, especially that of the pleura.
emmove
To move; to rouse; to excite.
eminence
That which is eminent or lofty; a high ground or place; a height.
emgalla
The South African wart hog. See Wart hog.
emeute
A seditious tumult; an outbreak.
emforth
According to; conformably to.
emicant
Beaming forth; flashing.
emigrant
Removing from one country to another; emigrating; as, an emigrant company or nation.
emit
To issue forth, as an order or decree; to print and send into circulation, as notes or bills of credit.
emeership
The rank or office of an Emir.
emissary
Exploring; spying.
emmantle
To cover over with, or as with, a mantle; to put about as a protection.
emmetropic
Pertaining to, or characterized by, emmetropia.
empierce
To pierce; to impierce.
empaistic
Having to do with inlaid work; -- especially used with reference to work of the ancient Greeks.
emolliate
To soften; to render effeminate.
emotioned
Affected with emotion.
empeach
To hinder. See Impeach.
emphasize
To utter or pronounce with a particular stress of voice; to make emphatic; as, to emphasize a word or a phrase.
empress
The consort of an emperor.
emplaster
To plaster over; to cover over so as to present a good appearance.
empoison
To poison; to impoison.
emptier
One who, or that which, empties.
empurple
To tinge or dye of a purple color; to color with purple; to impurple.
enation
Any unusual outgrowth from the surface of a thing, as of a petal; also, the capacity or act of producing such an outgrowth.
enact
To act; to perform; to do; to effect.
emuscation
A freeing from moss.
emulable
Capable of being emulated.
emunctory
Any organ or part of the body (as the kidneys, skin, etc.,) which serves to carry off excrementitious or waste matter.
emyd
A fresh-water tortoise of the family Emydidae.
enable
To give strength or ability to; to make firm and strong.
enantiosis
A figure of speech by which what is to be understood affirmatively is stated negatively, and the contrary; affirmation by contraries.
enaliosaur
One of the Enaliosauria.
enamel
A glassy, opaque bead obtained by the blowpipe.
enarched
Bent into a curve; -- said of a bend or other ordinary.
enascent
Coming into being; nascent.
enclasp
To clasp. See Inclasp.
enceinte
The line of works which forms the main inclosure of a fortress or place; -- called also body of the place.
enavigate
To sail away or over.
encage
To confine in a cage; to coop up.
enchafe
To chafe; to enrage; to heat.
encindered
Burnt to cinders.
encumber
To load with debts, or other legal claims; as, to encumber an estate with mortgages.
encoach
To carry in a coach.
encradle
To lay in a cradle.
encyclical
An encyclical letter, esp. one from a pope.
endable
That may be ended; terminable.
enguard
To surround as with a guard.
enfamish
To famish; to starve.
endue
An older spelling of Endow.
endmost
Farthest; remotest; at the very end.
endiaper
To decorate with a diaper pattern.
endless
Infinite; excessive; unlimited.
endoblast
Entoblast; endoplast. See Nucleus,
endrudge
To make a drudge or slave of.
enecate
To kill off; to destroy.
endwise
On end; erectly; in an upright position.
endysis
The act of developing a new coat of hair, a new set of feathers, scales, etc.; -- opposed to ecdysis.
enema
An injection, or clyster, thrown into the rectum as a medicine, or to impart nourishment.
energical
In a state of action; acting; operating.
engage
To gain for service; to bring in as associate or aid; to enlist; as, to engage friends to aid in a cause; to engage men for service.
enflesh
To clothe with flesh.
enfect
Contaminated with illegality.
enfilade
A line or straight passage, or the position of that which lies in a straight line.
enfold
To infold. See Infold.
enframe
To inclose, as in a frame.
engle
A favorite; a paramour; an ingle.
engender
To produce by the union of the sexes; to beget.
engild
To gild; to make splendent.
engore
To gore; to pierce; to lacerate.
engraff
To graft; to fix deeply.
enlight
To illumine; to enlighten.
enisled
Placed alone or apart, as if on an island; severed, as an island.
enhearten
To give heart to; to fill with courage; to embolden.
engyn
Variant of Engine.
enhalo
To surround with a halo.
enhydros
A variety of chalcedony containing water.
enigma
A dark, obscure, or inexplicable saying; a riddle; a statement, the hidden meaning of which is to be discovered or guessed.
enkennel
To put into a kennel.
enjall
To put into jail; to imprison.
enjoin
To lay upon, as an order or command; to give an injunction to; to direct with authority; to order; to charge.
enkindle
To set on fire; to inflame; to kindle.
enlace
To bind or encircle with lace, or as with lace; to lace; to encircle; to enfold; hence, to entangle.
enmossed
Covered with moss; mossed.
enmanche
Resembling, or covered with, a sleeve; -- said of the chief when lines are drawn from the middle point of the upper edge upper edge to the sides.
enlock
To lock; to inclose.
enlute
To coat with clay; to lute.
enmesh
To catch or entangle in, or as in, meshes.
enmist
To infold, as in a mist.
enniche
To place in a niche.
ennation
The ninth segment in insects.
ennead
The number nine or a group of nine.
ennui
A feeling of weariness and disgust; dullness and languor of spirits, arising from satiety or want of interest; tedium.
ennoble
To make noble; to elevate in degree, qualities, or excellence; to dignify.
enodation
The act or operation of clearing of knots, or of untying; hence, also, the solution of a difficulty.
enzootic
Afflicting animals; -- used of a disease affecting the animals of a district. It corresponds to an endemic disease among men.
enstamp
To stamp; to mark as /ith a stamp; to impress deeply.
ensample
An example; a pattern or model for imitation.
enquicken
To quicken; to make alive.
enough
Satisfying desire; giving content; adequate to meet the want; sufficient; -- usually, and more elegantly, following the noun to which it belongs.
enopla
One of the orders of Nemertina, characterized by the presence of a peculiar armature of spines or plates in the proboscis.
enormity
The state or quality of exceeding a measure or rule, or of being immoderate, monstrous, or outrageous.
enow
A form of Enough.
enpatron
To act the part of a patron towards; to patronize.
enrheum
To contract a rheum.
enrace
To enroot; to implant.
enregister
To register; to enroll or record; to inregister.
enrich
To make rich with any kind of wealth; to render opulent; to increase the possessions of; as, to enrich the understanding with knowledge.
enrobe
To invest or adorn with a robe; to attire.
ensiferous
Bearing a sword.
ensconce
To cover or shelter, as with a sconce or fort; to place or hide securely; to conceal.
enscale
To cover with scales.
enshedule
To insert in a schedule. See Schedule.
enseal
To impress with a seal; to mark as with a seal; hence, to ratify.
enshield
To defend, as with a shield; to shield.
ensnare
To catch in a snare. See Insnare.
ensky
To place in the sky or in heaven.
enslave
To reduce to slavery; to make a slave of; to subject to a dominant influence.
ensoul
To indue or imbue (a body) with soul.
ensphere
To place in a sphere; to envelop.
enucleate
To bring or peel out, as a kernel from its enveloping husks its enveloping husks or shell.
enticeable
Capable of being enticed.
entackle
To supply with tackle.
ensuable
Ensuing; following.
enswathe
To swathe; to envelop, as in swaddling clothes.
entelechy
An actuality; a conception completely actualized, in distinction from mere potential existence.
enthean
Divinely inspired; wrought up to enthusiasm.
entune
To tune; to intone.
entoblast
The inner germ layer; endoderm. See Nucleolus.
entrail
To interweave; to intertwine.
entwine
To twine, twist, or wreathe together or round.
enubilate
To clear from mist, clouds, or obscurity.
enviable
Fitted to excite envy; capable of awakening an ardent desire to posses or to resemble.
enuresis
An involuntary discharge of urine; incontinence of urine.
enumerator
One who enumerates.
enunciable
Capable of being enunciated or expressed.
envassal
To make a vassal of.
enveigle
To entice. See Inveigle.
enwallow
To plunge into, or roll in, flith; to wallow.
envolume
To form into, or incorporate with, a volume.
envy
Malice; ill will; spite.
enwoman
To endow with the qualities of a woman.
enwind
To wind about; to encircle.
enwrap
To envelop. See Inwrap.
ephyra
A stage in the development of discophorous medusae, when they first begin to swim about after being detached from the strobila.
eparch
In ancient Greece, the governor or perfect of a province; in modern Greece, the ruler of an eparchy.
eosin
A yellow or brownish red dyestuff obtained by the action of bromine on fluorescein, and named from the fine rose-red which it imparts to silk.
eolian
Formed, or deposited, by the action of wind, as dunes.
enzyme
An unorganized or unformed ferment, in distinction from an organized or living ferment; a soluble, or chemical, ferment.
eocene
The Eocene formation.
eophyte
A fossil plant which is found in the lowest beds of the Silurian age.
eosaurus
An extinct marine reptile from the coal measures of Nova Scotia; -- so named because supposed to be of the earliest known reptiles.
epacris
A genus of shrubs, natives of Australia, New Zealand, etc., having pretty white, red, or purple blossoms, and much resembling heaths.
eosphorite
A hydrous phosphate of alumina and manganese. It is generally of a rose-pink color, -- whence the name.
eozoic
Of or pertaining to rocks or strata older than the Paleozoic, in many of which the eozoon has been found.
epagoge
The adducing of particular examples so as to lead to a universal conclusion; the argument by induction.
epanodos
A figure of speech in which the parts of a sentence or clause are repeated in inverse order
epexegesis
A full or additional explanation; exegesis.
epeira
A genus of spiders, including the common garden spider (E. diadema). They spin geometrical webs. See Garden spider.
epaule
The shoulder of a bastion, or the place where its face and flank meet and form the angle, called the angle of the shoulder.
epaxial
Above, or on the dorsal side of, the axis of the skeleton; episkeletal.
epen
See Epencephalon.
eperlan
The European smelt (Osmerus eperlanus).
ephippial
Saddle-shaped; occupying an ephippium.
epha
A Hebrew dry measure, supposed to be equal to two pecks and five quarts. ten ephahs make one homer.
ephemera
A fever of one day's continuance only.
ephor
A magistrate; one of a body of five magistrates chosen by the people of ancient Sparta. They exercised control even over the king.
ephraim
A hunter's name for the grizzly bear.
epitaph
An inscription on, or at, a tomb, or a grave, in memory or commendation of the one buried there; a sepulchral inscription.
epileptic
Pertaining to, affected with, or of the nature of, epilepsy.
epideictic
Serving to show forth, explain, or exhibit; -- applied by the Greeks to a kind of oratory, which, by full amplification, seeks to persuade.
epiblast
The outer layer of the blastoderm; the ectoderm. See Blastoderm, Delamination.
epic
An epic or heroic poem. See Epic, a.
epigaea
An American genus of plants, containing but a single species (E. repens), the trailing arbutus.
epihyal
A segment next above the ceratohyal in the hyoidean arch.
epiornis
One of the gigantic ostrichlike birds of the genus Aepiornis, only recently extinct. Its remains have been found in Madagascar.
epimachus
A genus of highly ornate and brilliantly colored birds of Australia, allied to the birds of Paradise.
epinastic
A term applied to that phase of vegetable growth in which an organ grows more rapidly on its upper than on its under surface.
epiphany
An appearance, or a becoming manifest.
episcopal
Governed by bishops; as, an episcopal church.
eponyme
The hypothetical individual who is assumed as the person from whom any race, city, etc., took its name; as, Hellen is an eponym of the Hellenes.
epizoon
One of the artificial group of invertebrates of various kinds, which live parasitically upon the exterior of other animals; an ectozoon.
epizeuxis
A figure by which a word is repeated with vehemence or emphasis, as in the following lines: -
epozoic
Living upon the exterior of another animal; ectozoic; -- said of external parasites.
epoch
A division of time characterized by the prevalence of similar conditions of the earth; commonly a minor division or part of a period.
epode
A species of lyric poem, invented by Archilochus, in which a longer verse is followed by a shorter one; as, the Epodes of Horace.
eprouvette
An apparatus for testing or proving the strength of gunpowder.
epopoeia
An epic poem; epic poetry.
epotation
A drinking up; a quaffing.
epulary
Of or pertaining to a feast or banquet.
epsomite
Native sulphate of magnesia or Epsom salt.
epure
A draught or model from which to build; especially, one of the full size of the work to be done; a detailed drawing.
etymic
Relating to the etymon; as, an etymic word.
eskimo
One of a peculiar race inhabiting Arctic America and Greenland. In many respects the Eskimos resemble the Mongolian race.
ermine
By metonymy, the office or functions of a judge, whose state robe, lined with ermine, is emblematical of purity and honor without stain.
eretation
A creeping forth.
erative
Pertaining to the Muse Erato who presided over amatory poetry.
equus
A genus of mammals, including the horse, ass, etc.
equerry
A large stable or lodge for horses.
equicrural
Having equal legs or sides; isosceles.
eradiate
To shoot forth, as rays of light; to beam; to radiate.
erasable
Capable of being erased.
erect
Upright, or having a vertical position; not inverted; not leaning or bent; not prone; as, to stand erect.
erbium
A rare metallic element associated with several other rare elements in the mineral gadolinite from Ytterby in Sweden.
erebus
A place of nether darkness, being the gloomy space through which the souls passed to Hades. See Milton's "Paradise Lost," Book II.
erelong
Before the /apse of a long time; soon; -- usually separated, ere long.
eremitical
Of or pertaining to an eremite; hermitical; living in solitude.
eric
A recompense formerly given by a murderer to the relatives of the murdered person.
erewhiles
Some time ago; a little while before; heretofore.
ereption
A snatching away.
erethism
A morbid degree of excitement or irritation in an organ.
ergat
To deduce logically, as conclusions.
ergo
Therefore; consequently; -- often used in a jocular way.
erin
An early, and now a poetic, name of Ireland.
eridanus
A long, winding constellation extending southward from Taurus and containing the bright star Achernar.
erigible
Capable of being erected.
erlking
A personification, in German and Scandinavian mythology, of a spirit natural power supposed to work mischief and ruin, esp.
erme
To grieve; to feel sad.
eruca
An insect in the larval state; a caterpillar; a larva.
errable
Liable to error; fallible.
erogate
To lay out, as money; to deal out; to expend.
erne
A sea eagle, esp. the European white-tailed sea eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla).
erode
To eat into or away; to corrode; as, canker erodes the flesh.
erose
Irregular or uneven as if eaten or worn away.
eroteme
A mark indicating a question; a note of interrogation.
erse
A name sometimes given to that dialect of the Celtic which is spoken in the Highlands of Scotland; -- called, by the Highlanders, Gaelic.
erthine
A medicine designed to be snuffed up the nose, to promote discharges of mucus; a sternutatory.
erroneous
Wandering; straying; deviating from the right course; -- hence, irregular; unnatural.
erst
Previously; before; formerly; heretofore.
erubescent
Red, or reddish; blushing.
erythema
A disease of the skin, in which a diffused inflammation forms rose-colored patches of variable size.
erumpent
Breaking out; -- said of certain fungi which burst through the texture of leaves.
erudiate
To instruct; to educate; to teach.
erugate
Freed from wrinkles; smooth.
erupt
To cause to burst forth; to eject; as, to erupt lava.
eryngo
A plant of the genus Eryngium.
escopette
A kind of firearm; a carbine.
escalade
A furious attack made by troops on a fortified place, in which ladders are used to pass a ditch or mount a rampart.
eschar
A dry slough, crust, or scab, which separates from the healthy part of the body, as that produced by a burn, or the application of caustics.
escuage
Service of the shield, a species of knight service by which a tenant was bound to follow his lord to war, at his own charge.
escribed
Drawn outside of; -- used to designate a circle that touches one of the sides of a given triangle, and also the other two sides produced.
esexual
Sexless; asexual.
estrade
A portion of the floor of a room raised above the general level, as a place for a bed or a throne; a platform; a dais.
espressivo
With expression.
esox
A genus of fresh-water fishes, including pike and pickerel.
esodic
Conveying impressions from the surface of the body to the spinal cord; -- said of certain nerves. Opposed to exodic.
esloin
To remove; to banish; to withdraw; to avoid; to eloign.
esnecy
A prerogative given to the eldest coparcener to choose first after an inheritance is divided.
esophageal
Pertaining to the esophagus.
esoterics
Mysterious or hidden doctrines; secret science.
espial
The act of espying; notice; discovery.
espadon
A long, heavy, two-handed and two-edged sword, formerly used by Spanish foot soldiers and by executioners.
especially
In an especial manner; chiefly; particularly; peculiarly; in an uncommon degree.
esplanade
A clear space between a citadel and the nearest houses of the town.
espousal
The uniting or allying one's self with anything; maintenance; adoption; as, the espousal of a quarrel.
essentiate
To form or constitute the essence or being of.
essay
An effort made, or exertion of body or mind, for the performance of anything; a trial; attempt; as, to make an essay to benefit a friend.
espy
To inspect narrowly; to examine and keep watch upon; to watch; to observe.
esquire
To wait on as an esquire or attendant in public; to attend.
essence
The constituent elementary notions which constitute a complex notion, and must be enumerated to define it; sometimes called the nominal essence.
esential
Existence; being.
esteem
To set a value on; to appreciate the worth of; to estimate; to value; to reckon.
essoign
An excuse for not appearing in court at the return of process; the allegation of an excuse to the court.
establish
To make stable or firm; to fix immovably or firmly; to set (a thing) in a place and make it stable there; to settle; to confirm.
estimable
Capable of being estimated or valued; as, estimable damage.
estoile
A six-pointed star whose rays are wavy, instead of straight like those of a mullet.
ethmoidal
Like a sieve; cribriform.
eteostic
A kind of chronogram.
etacism
The pronunciation of the Greek / (eta) like the Italian e long, that is like a in the English word ate.
estuarine
Pertaining to an estuary; estuary.
esurient
Inclined to eat; hungry; voracious.
etagere
A piece of furniture having a number of uninclosed shelves or stages, one above another, for receiving articles of elegance or use.
etch
A variant of Eddish.
ethal
A white waxy solid, C16H33.OH; -- called also cetylic alcohol. See Cetylic alcohol, under Cetylic.
eternal
Without beginning or end of existence; always existing.
etesian
Periodical; annual; -- applied to winds which annually blow from the north over the Mediterranean, esp.
ethene
Ethylene; olefiant gas.
ethically
According to, in harmony with, moral principles or character.
etiology
The science of causes. Same as /tiology.
ethyl
A monatomic, hydrocarbon radical, C2H5 of the paraffin series, forming the essential radical of ethane, and of common alcohol and ether.
ethnarch
The governor of a province or people.
ethologist
One who studies or writes upon ethology.
etiolate
To become white or whiter; to be whitened or blanched by excluding the light of the sun, as, plants.
etoolin
A yellowish coloring matter found in plants grown in darkness, which is supposed to be an antecedent condition of chlorophyll.
etrurian
Of or relating to ancient Etruria, in Italy.
etna
A kind of small, portable, cooking apparatus for which heat is furnished by a spirit lamp.
etnean
Pertaining to Etna, a volcanic mountain in Sicily.
etude
A composition in the fine arts which is intended, or may serve, for a study.
ettle
To earn. [Obs.] See Addle, to earn.
etui
A case for one or several small articles; esp., a box in which scissors, tweezers, and other articles of toilet or of daily use are carried.
eval
Relating to time or duration.
euonymin
A principle or mixture of principles derived from Euonymus atropurpureus, or spindle tree.
eugubine
Of or pertaining to the ancient town of Eugubium (now Gubbio); as, the Eugubine tablets, or tables, or inscriptions.
eucrasy
Such a due mixture of qualities in bodies as constitutes health or soundness.
eucharis
A genus of South American amaryllidaceous plants with large and beautiful white blossoms.
etypical
Diverging from, or lacking conformity to, a type.
eucalyptol
A volatile, terpenelike oil extracted from the eucalyptus, and consisting largely of cymene.
euclase
A brittle gem occurring in light green, transparent crystals, affording a brilliant clinodiagonal cleavage.
eucopepoda
A group which includes the typical copepods and the lerneans.
eudoxian
A follower of Eudoxius, patriarch of Antioch and Constantinople in the 4th century, and a celebrated defender of the doctrines of Arius.
euctical
Expecting a wish; supplicatory.
eudialyte
A mineral of a brownish red color and vitreous luster, consisting chiefly of the silicates of iron, zirconia, and lime.
euganoidei
A group which includes the bony ganoids, as the gar pikes.
eugenic
Pertaining to, or derived from, cloves; as, eugenic acid.
eulogical
Bestowing praise of eulogy; commendatory; eulogistic.
euisopoda
A group which includes the typical Isopoda.
euharmonic
Producing mathematically perfect harmony or concord; sweetly or perfectly harmonious.
euhemerist
One who advocates euhemerism.
eulachon
The candlefish. [Written also oulachan, oolacan, and ulikon.] See Candlefish.
eulerian
Pertaining to Euler, a German mathematician of the 18th century.
eumolpus
A genus of small beetles, one species of which (E. viti) is very injurious to the vines in the wine countries of Europe.
eulytite
A mineral, consisting chiefly of the silicate of bismuth, found at Freiberg; -- called also culytine.
eumenides
A euphemistic name for the Furies of Erinyes.
eunomian
Of or pertaining to Eunomius or his doctrine.
eunuch
A male of the human species castrated; commonly, one of a class of such persons, in Oriental countries, having charge of the women's apartments.
euroclydon
A tempestuous northeast wind which blows in the Mediterranean. See Levanter.
eupittone
A yellow, crystalline substance, resembling aurin, and obtained by the oxidation of pittacal; -- called also eupittonic acid.
eupatorium
A genus of perennial, composite herbs including hemp agrimony, boneset, throughwort, etc.
euornithes
The division of Aves which includes all the typical birds, or all living birds except the penguins and birds of ostrichlike form.
euosmitte
A fossil resin, so called from its strong, peculiar, pleasant odor.
eupepsy
Soundness of the nutritive or digestive organs; good concoction or digestion; -- opposed to dyspepsia.
euphemize
To express by a euphemism, or in delicate language; to make use of euphemistic expressions.
eupryion
A contrivance for obtaining a light instantaneous, as a lucifer match.
euplastic
Organizable substance by which the tissues of an animal body are renewed.
eupnaea
Normal breathing where arterialization of the blood is normal, in distinction from dyspnaea, in which the blood is insufficiently arterialized.
eurasian
A child of a European parent on the one side and an Asiatic on the other.
euripize
To whirl hither and thither.
euthanasia
An easy death; a mode of dying to be desired.
eustachian
Discovered by Eustachius.
euryale
A genus of water lilies, growing in India and China. The only species (E. ferox) is very prickly on the peduncles and calyx.
eusebian
A follower of Eusebius, bishop of Caesarea, who was a friend and protector of Arius.
eutaxy
Good or established order or arrangement.
euterpe
The Muse who presided over music.
euxenite
A brownish black mineral with a metallic luster, found in Norway. It contains niobium, titanium, yttrium, and uranium, with some other metals.
eutrophy
Healthy nutrition; soundless as regards the nutritive functions.
euxanthic
Having a yellow color; pertaining to, derived from, or resembling, euxanthin.
evade
To escape; to slip away; -- sometimes with from.
evacuant
Emptying; evacuative; purgative; cathartic.
evagation
A wandering about; excursion; a roving.
exaggerate
To heap up; to accumulate.
evirate
To emasculate; to dispossess of manhood.
ever
At any time; at any period or point of time.
evasible
That may be evaded.
evanesce
To vanish away; to become dissipated and disappear, like vapor.
evaporable
Capable of being converted into vapor, or dissipated by evaporation.
evectics
The branch of medical science which teaches the method of acquiring a good habit of body.
even
Evening. See Eve, n. 1.
evidence
One who bears witness.
evet
The common newt or eft. In America often applied to several species of aquatic salamanders.
evict
To dispossess by a judicial process; to dispossess by paramount right or claim of such right; to eject; to oust.
evil
Having or exhibiting bad moral qualities; morally corrupt; wicked; wrong; vicious; as, evil conduct, thoughts, heart, words, and the like.
evince
To conquer; to subdue.
evomition
The act of vomiting.
evocate
To call out or forth; to summon; to evoke.
eviscerate
To take out the entrails of; to disembowel; to gut.
evitate
To shun; to avoid.
evoke
To call out; to summon forth.
evolatical
Apt to fly away.
ewry
An office or place of household service where the ewers were formerly kept.
evulgate
To publish abroad.
ewer
A kind of widemouthed pitcher or jug; esp., one used to hold water for the toilet.
exacerbate
To render more violent or bitter; to irriate; to exasperate; to imbitter, as passions or disease.
exaeresis
In old writers, the operations concerned in the removal of parts of the body.
excoct
To boil out; to produce by boiling.
exaugurate
To annul the consecration of; to secularize; to unhellow.
exanguious
Bloodless. [Obs.] See Exsanguious.
exalt
To raise high; to elevate; to lift up.
examen
Examination; inquiry.
exarate
To plow up; also, to engrave; to write.
exasperate
Exasperated; imbittered.
exchange
The act of giving or taking one thing in return for another which is regarded as an equivalent; as, an exchange of cattle for grain.
excalceate
To deprive of shoes.
excecation
The act of making blind.
excipient
Taking an exception.
exclaimer
One who exclaims.
exegesis
Exposition; explanation; especially, a critical explanation of a text or portion of Scripture.
exeat
A license for absence from a college or a religious house.
excreable
Capable of being discharged by spitting.
excubation
A keeping watch.
execrable
Deserving to be execrated; accursed; damnable; detestable; abominable; as, an execrable wretch.
exedent
Eating out; consuming.
exequatur
Official recognition or permission.
exemplar
A model, original, or pattern, to be copied or imitated; a specimen; sometimes; an ideal model or type, as that which an artist conceives.
exenterate
To take out the bowels or entrails of; to disembowel; to eviscerate; as, exenterated fishes.
exesion
The act of eating out or through.
exercent
Practicing; professional.
exeunt
They go out, or retire from the scene; as, exeunt all except Hamlet. See 1st Exit.
flora
The goddess of flowers and spring.
felicitate
Made very happy.
faience
Glazed earthenware; esp., that which is decorated in color.
exudation
The act of exuding; sweating; a discharge of humors, moisture, juice, or gum, as through pores or incisions; also, the substance exuded.
expect
To wait for; to await.
exit
He (or she ) goes out, or retires from view; as, exit Macbeth.
exiccation
See Exsiccation.
exhibit
To administer as a remedy; as, to exhibit calomel.
exfoliate
To separate and come off in scales or laminae, as pieces of carious bone or of bark.
exhalable
Capable of being exhaled or evaporated.
exhort
To deliver exhortation; to use words or arguments to incite to good deeds.
exhumation
The act of exhuming that which has been buried; as, the exhumation of a body.
eximious
Select; choice; hence, extraordinary, excellent.
exigent
Exacting or requiring immediate aid or action; pressing; critical.
exile
The person expelled from his country by authority; also, one who separates himself from his home.
exinanite
To make empty; to render of no effect; to humble.
exist
To be as a fact and not as a mode; to have an actual or real being, whether material or spiritual.
exoplasm
See Ectosarc, and Ectoplasm.
exogamous
Relating to exogamy; marrying outside of the limits of one's own tribe; -- opposed to endogenous.
exocardial
Situated or arising outside of the heat; as, exocardial murmurs; -- opposed to endocardiac.
exode
Departure; exodus; esp., the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt.
exolete
Obsolete; out of use; state; insipid.
exon
A native or inhabitant of Exeter, in England.
exosculate
To kiss; especially, to kiss repeatedly or fondly.
exrable
Capable of being moved by entreaty; pitiful; tender.
exorate
To persuade, or to gain, by entreaty.
exoterical
External; public; suitable to be imparted to the public; hence, capable of being readily or fully comprehended; -- opposed to esoteric, or secret.
expand
To lay open by extending; to open wide; to spread out; to diffuse; as, a flower expands its leaves.
exsect
A cutting out or away.
explosion
A bursting with violence and loud noise, because of internal pressure; as, the explosion of a gun, a bomb, a steam boiler, etc.
expiable
Capable of being expiated or atoned for; as, an expiable offense; expiable guilt.
exrerience
To exercise; to train by practice.
experiment
To try; to know, perceive, or prove, by trial experience.
explain
To flatten; to spread out; to unfold; to expand.
eploring
Employed in, or designed for, exploration.
expugn
To take by assault; to storm; to overcome; to vanquish; as, to expugn cities; to expugn a person by arguments.
expolish
To polish thoroughly.
express
Exactly representing; exact.
exquire
To search into or out.
exscind
To cut off; to separate or expel from union; to extirpate.
extemporal
Extemporaneous; unpremeditated.
exstrophy
The eversion or turning out of any organ, or of its inner surface; as, exstrophy of the eyelid or of the bladder.
exsiccant
Having the quality of drying up; causing a drying up.
exspuition
A discharge of saliva by spitting.
exsuccous
Destitute of juice; dry; sapless. Latham.
extance
Outward existence.
extra
Beyond what is due, usual, expected, or necessary; additional; supernumerary; also, extraordinarily good; superior; as, extra work; extra pay.
extill
To drop or distill.
extol
To place on high; to lift up; to elevate.
extuberant
Swollen out; protuberant.
exuberate
To abound; to be in great abundance.
fabaceous
Having the nature of a bean; like a bean.
eyeglance
A glance of eye.
exuvia
N. sing. of Exuviae.
exuperable
Surmountable; superable.
exulcerate
To corrode; to fret; to chafe; to inflame.
exundate
To overflow; to inundate.
exurgent
Arising; coming to light.
exustion
The act or operation of burning up.
eyeball
The ball or globe of the eye.
eyalet
Formerly, one of the administrative divisions or provinces of the Ottoman Empire; -- now called a vilayet.
eyas
A nesting or unfledged bird; in falconry, a young hawk from the nest, not able to prey for itself.
eyed
Heaving (such or so many) eyes; -- used in composition; as sharp-eyed; dull-eyed; sad-eyed; ox-eyed Juno; myriad-eyed.
eyeflap
A blinder on a horse's bridle.
eyewater
A wash or lotion for application to the eyes.
eyer
One who eyes another.
eyehole
A circular opening to recive a hook, cord, ring, or rope; an eyelet.
eyelash
The fringe of hair that edges the eyelid; -- usually in the pl.
eyesalve
Ointment for the eye.
eyet
An island. See Eyot.
eyot
A little island in a river or lake. See Ait.
eyght
An island. See Eyot.
eyen
Plural of eye; -- now obsolete, or used only in poetry.
eyre
A journey in circuit of certain judges called justices in eyre (or in itinere).
eyry
The nest of a bird of prey or other large bird that builds in a lofty place; aerie.
fact
A doing, making, or preparing.
face
The principal dressed surface of a plate, disk, or pulley; the principal flat surface of a part or object.
fable
A Feigned story or tale, intended to instruct or amuse; a fictitious narration intended to enforce some useful truth or precept; an apologue.
fabella
One of the small sesamoid bones situated behind the condyles of the femur, in some mammals.
fabian
Of, pertaining to, or in the manner of, the Roman general, Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus; cautious; dilatory; avoiding a decisive contest.
fabric
The structure of anything; the manner in which the parts of a thing are united; workmanship; texture; make; as cloth of a beautiful fabric.
fabulist
One who invents or writes fables.
facial
Of or pertaining to the face; as, the facial artery, vein, or nerve.
faser
One who faces; one who puts on a false show; a bold-faced person.
facet
A little face; a small, plane surface; as, the facets of a diamond.
facound
Speech; eloquence.
facsimile
A copy of anything made, either so as to be deceptive or so as to give every part and detail of the original; an exact copy or likeness.
faeces
Excrement; ordure; also, settlings; sediment after infusion or distillation.
fade
Weak; insipid; tasteless; commonplace.
faculae
Groups of small shining spots on the surface of the sun which are brighter than the other parts of the photosphere.
faddle
To trifle; to toy.
fadge
To fit; to suit; to agree.
fading
Losing freshness, color, brightness, or vigor.
fagot
A bundle of pieces of wrought iron to be worked over into bars or other shapes by rolling or hammering at a welding heat; a pile.
fagend
An end of poorer quality, or in a spoiled condition, as the coarser end of a web of cloth, the untwisted end of a rope, ect.
fagging
Laborious drudgery; esp., the acting as a drudge for another at an English school.
fahlband
A stratum in crystalline rock, containing metallic sulphides.
faham
The leaves of an orchid (Angraecum fragrans), of the islands of Bourbon and Mauritius, used (in France) as a substitute for Chinese tea.
fahrenheit
Conforming to the scale used by Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit in the graduation of his thermometer; of or relating to Fahrenheit's thermometric scale.
fatal
Proceeding from, or appointed by, fate or destiny; necessary; inevitable.
fang
To catch; to seize, as with the teeth; to lay hold of; to gripe; to clutch.
falsary
A falsifier of evidence.
fakir
An Oriental religious ascetic or begging monk.
fair
Free from spots, specks, dirt, or imperfection; unblemished; clean; pure.
fail
To be affected with want; to come short; to lack; to be deficient or unprovided; -- used with of.
fain
Well-pleased; glad; apt; wont; fond; inclined.
faith
Fidelity to one's promises, or allegiance to duty, or to a person honored and beloved; loyalty.
fake
One of the circles or windings of a cable or hawser, as it lies in a coil; a single turn or coil.
faldfee
A fee or rent paid by a tenant for the privilege of faldage on his own ground.
falanaka
A viverrine mammal of Madagascar (Eupleres Goudotii), allied to the civet; -- called also Falanouc.
falcade
The action of a horse, when he throws himself on his haunches two or three times, bending himself, as it were, in very quick curvets.
falernian
Of or pertaining to Mount Falernus, in Italy; as, Falernianwine.
fall
To find a final outlet; to discharge its waters; to empty; -- with into; as, the river Rhone falls into the Mediterranean.
famular
Domestic; familiar.
fame
Public report or rumor.
falter
To thrash in the chaff; also, to cleanse or sift, as barley.
faluns
A series of strata, of the Middle Tertiary period, of France, abounding in shells, and used by Lyell as the type of his Miocene subdivision.
familiar
Of or pertaining to a family; domestic.
famosity
The state or quality of being famous.
fandango
A lively dance, in 3-8 or 6-8 time, much practiced in Spain and Spanish America. Also, the tune to which it is danced.
fanal
A lighthouse, or the apparatus placed in it for giving light.
fancied
Formed or conceived by the fancy; unreal; as, a fancied wrong.
fane
A temple; a place consecrated to religion; a church.
fanfare
A flourish of trumpets, as in coming into the lists, etc.; also, a short and lively air performed on hunting horns during the chase.
farlie
An unusual or unexpected thing; a wonder. See Fearly.
farabout
A going out of the way; a digression.
fanner
A fan wheel; a fan blower. See under Fan.
fanion
A small flag sometimes carried at the head of the baggage of a brigade.
fanlike
Resembling a fan;
fanon
A term applied to various articles, as: (a) A peculiar striped scarf worn by the pope at mass, and by eastern bishops.
fantail
A variety of the domestic pigeon, so called from the shape of the tail.
fare
To go; to pass; to journey; to travel.
farce
To stuff with forcemeat; hence, to fill with mingled ingredients; to fill full; to stuff.
fard
Paint used on the face.
farfetch
To bring from far; to seek out studiously.
farina
A fine flour or meal made from cereal grains or from the starch or fecula of vegetables, extracted by various processes, and used in cookery.
farrow
Not producing young in a given season or year; -- said only of cows.
faroese
An inhabitant, or, collectively, inhabitants, of the Faroe islands.
farm
The rent of land, -- originally paid by reservation of part of its products.
farness
The state of being far off; distance; remoteness.
farrago
A mass composed of various materials confusedly mixed; a medley; a mixture.
farfow
To bring forth (young); -- said only of swine.
fasces
A bundle of rods, having among them an ax with the blade projecting, borne before the Roman magistrates as a badge of their authority.
farse
An addition to, or a paraphrase of, some part of the Latin service in the vernacular; -- common in English before the Reformation.
farther
More remote; more distant than something else.
fassaite
A variety of pyroxene, from the valley of Fassa, in the Tyrol.
fash
To vex; to tease; to trouble.
fast
To abstain from food; to omit to take nourishment in whole or in part; to go hungry.
feal
Faithful; loyal.
faun
A god of fields and shipherds, diddering little from the satyr. The fauns are usually represented as half goat and half man.
fatten
To make fat; to feed for slaughter; to make fleshy or plump with fat; to fill full; to fat.
fatidical
Having power to foretell future events; prophetic; fatiloquent; as, the fatidical oak.
fate
Appointed lot; allotted life; arranged or predetermined event; destiny; especially, the final lot; doom; ruin; death.
fathead
A cyprinoid fish of the Mississippi valley (Pimephales promelas); -- called also black-headed minnow.
fatling
A calf, lamb, kid, or other young animal fattened for slaughter; a fat animal; -- said of such animals as are used for food.
fatner
One who fattens. [R.] See Fattener.
fauces
The throat of a calyx, corolla, etc.
fatuitous
Stupid; fatuous.
faubourg
A suburb of French city; also, a district now within a city, but formerly without its walls.
faugh
An exclamation of contempt, disgust, or abhorrence.
fauld
The arch over the dam of a blast furnace; the tymp arch.
favonian
Pertaining to the west wind; soft; mild; gentle.
favaginous
Formed like, or resembling, a honeycomb.
fauteuil
An armchair; hence (because the members sit in fauteuils or armchairs), membership in the French Academy.
fauvette
A small singing bird, as the nightingale and warblers.
favel
Yellow; fal/ow; dun.
favillous
Of or pertaining to ashes.
fawn
A young deer; a buck or doe of the first year. See Buck.
favus
A disease of the scalp, produced by a vegetable parasite.
fawe
Fain; glad; delighted.
fayalite
A black, greenish, or brownish mineral of the chrysolite group. It is a silicate of iron.
feague
To beat or whip; to drive.
fedity
Turpitude; vileness.
fecal
Relating to, or containing, dregs, feces, or ordeure; faecal.
feat
An act; a deed; an exploit.
fear
A variant of Fere, a mate, a companion.
feasible
Capable of being done, executed, or effected; practicable.
feaze
To untwist; to unravel, as the end of a rope.
febrific
Producing fever.
feckless
Spiritless; weak; worthless.
feces
Dregs; sediment; excrement. See FAeces.
fecial
Pertaining to heralds, declarations of war, and treaties of peace; as, fecial law.
fecula
Any pulverulent matter obtained from plants by simply breaking down the texture, washing with water, and subsidence.
federal
Consisting or pertaining to such a government; as, the Federal Constitution; a Federal officer.
feet
Fact; performance.
feel
To touch; to handle; to examine by touching; as, feel this piece of silk; hence, to make trial of; to test; often with out.
feeble
Deficient in physical strength; weak; infirm; debilitated.
feed
To give food to; to supply with nourishment; to satisfy the physical huger of.
feere
A consort, husband or wife; a companion; a fere.
feese
The short run before a leap.
feign
To give a mental existence to, as to something not real or actual; to imagine; to invent; hence, to pretend; to form and relate as if true.
feeze
To turn, as a screw.
fehling
See Fehling's solution, under Solution.
feitsui
The Chinese name for a highly prized variety of pale green jade. See Jade.
feint
Feigned; counterfeit.
feize
See Feeze, v. t.
filial
Of or pertaining to a son or daughter; becoming to a child in relation to his parents; as, filial obedience.
feud
A combination of kindred to avenge injuries or affronts, done or offered to any of their blood, on the offender and all his race.
feracious
Fruitful; producing abundantly.
femur
The proximal segment of the hind limb containing the thigh bone; the thigh. See Coxa.
felwort
A European herb (Swertia perennis) of the Gentian family.
felsite
A finegrained rock, flintlike in fracture, consisting essentially of orthoclase feldspar with occasional grains of quartz.
fell
Cruel; barbarous; inhuman; fierce; savage; ravenous.
felon
A person who has committed a felony.
felt
Imp. & p. p. / a. from Feel.
felucca
A small, swift-sailing vessel, propelled by oars and lateen sails, -- once common in the Mediterranean.
femineity
Womanliness; femininity.
female
An individual of the sex which conceives and brings forth young, or (in a wider sense) which has an ovary and produces ova.
femerell
A lantern, or louver covering, placed on a roof, for ventilation or escape of smoke.
femme
A woman. See Feme, n.
femoral
Pertaining to the femur or thigh; as, the femoral artery.
fenks
The refuse whale blubber, used as a manure, and in the manufacture of Prussian blue.
fenerate
To put money to usury; to lend on interest.
fence
That which fends off attack or danger; a defense; a protection; a cover; security; shield.
fend
To keep off; to prevent from entering or hitting; to ward off; to shut out; -- often with off; as, to fend off blows.
fengite
A kind of marble or alabaster, sometimes used for windows on account of its transparency.
fenian
A member of a secret organization, consisting mainly of Irishment, having for its aim the overthrow of English rule in ireland.
fenugreek
A plant (trigonella Foenum Graecum) cultivated for its strong-smelling seeds, which are
fennec
A small, African, foxlike animal (Vulpes zerda) of a pale fawn color, remarkable for the large size of its ears.
fenowed
Corrupted; decayed; moldy. See Vinnewed.
feod
A feud. See 2d Feud.
feoff
To invest with a fee or feud; to give or grant a corporeal hereditament to; to enfeoff.
fescennine
Pertaining to, or resembling, the Fescennines.
fern
Ancient; old. [Obs.] "Pilgrimages to . . . ferne halwes." [saints].
feria
A week day, esp. a day which is neither a festival nor a fast.
ferding
A measure of land mentioned in Domesday Book. It is supposed to have consisted of a few acres only.
fere
A mate or companion; -- often used of a wife.
ferly
Singular; wonderful; extraordinary.
fermacy
Medicine; pharmacy.
fertile
Capable of producing fruit; fruit-bearing; as, fertile flowers.
ferocious
Fierce; savage; wild; indicating cruelty; ravenous; rapacious; as, ferocious look or features; a ferocious lion.
ferrandine
A stuff made of silk and wool.
ferula
The imperial scepter in the Byzantine or Eastern Empire.
fervency
The state of being fervent or warm; ardor; warmth of feeling or devotion; eagerness.
fete
To feast; to honor with a festival.
fetal
Pertaining to, or connected with, a fetus; as, fetal circulation; fetal membranes.
fesswise
In the manner of fess.
festal
Of or pertaining to a holiday or a feast; joyous; festive.
fetch
A stratagem by which a thing is indirectly brought to pass, or by which one thing seems intended and another is done; a trick; an artifice.
fethcer
One wo fetches or brings.
fetor
A strong, offensive smell; stench; fetidness.
fetish
Any object to which one is excessively devoted.
fetlock
The cushionlike projection, bearing a tuft of long hair, on the back side of the leg above the hoof of the horse and similar animals.
fetwah
A written decision of a Turkish mufti on some point of law.
fetter
Anything that confines or restrains; a restraint.
feuar
One who holds a feu.
fiddle
A stringed instrument of music played with a bow; a violin; a kit.
fibber
One who tells fibs.
fiacre
A kind of French hackney coach.
fever
To put into a fever; to affect with fever; as, a fevered lip.
feuillants
A reformed branch of the Bernardines, founded in 1577 at Feuillans, near Toulouse, in France.
feuter
To set close; to fix in rest, as a spear.
fewness
The state of being few; smallness of number; paucity.
feyre
A fair or market.
fiasco
A complete or ridiculous failure, esp. of a musical performance, or of any pretentious undertaking.
fiance
To betroth; to affiance.
fiar
One in whom the property of an estate is vested, subject to the estate of a life renter.
fiat
An authoritative command or order to do something; an effectual decree.
fiaunt
Commission; fiat; order; decree.
fichu
A light cape, usually of lace, worn by women, to cover the neck and throat, and extending to the shoulders.
fibula
A brooch, clasp, or buckle.
fibre
One of the delicate, threadlike portions of which the tissues of plants and animals are in part constituted; as, the fiber of flax or of muscle.
fibster
One who tells fibs.
fice
A small dog; -- written also fise, fyce, fiste, etc.
ficttelite
A white crystallized mineral resin from the Fichtelgebirge, Bavaria.
fictile
Molded, or capable of being molded, into form by art; relating to pottery or to molding in any soft material.
fickleness
The quality of being fickle; instability; inconsonancy.
fico
A fig; an insignificant trifle, no more than the snap of one's thumb; a sign of contempt made by the fingers, expressing.
ficus
A genus of trees or shrubs, one species of which (F. Carica) produces the figs of commerce; the fig tree.
fidalgo
The lowest title of nobility in Portugal, corresponding to that of Hidalgo in Spain.
fifteen
Five and ten; one more than fourteen.
fiduciary
One who holds a thing in trust for another; a trustee.
fidia
A genus of small beetles, of which one species (the grapevine Fidia, F. longipes) is very injurious to vines in America.
fidejussor
A surety; one bound for another, conjointly with him; a guarantor.
fidget
To move uneasily one way and the other; to move irregularly, or by fits and starts.
fiducial
Having faith or trust; confident; undoubting; firm.
fidiciary
Involving confidence or trust; confident; undoubting; faithful; firm; as, in a fiduciary capacity.
fiend
An implacable or malicious foe; one who is diabolically wicked or cruel; an infernal being; -- applied specifically to the devil or a demon.
fief
An estate held of a superior on condition of military service; a fee; a feud. See under Benefice, n., 2.
field
Cleared land; land suitable for tillage or pasture; cultivated ground; the open country.
fierasfer
A genus of small, slender fishes, remarkable for their habit of living as commensals in other animals.
fife
A small shrill pipe, resembling the piccolo flute, used chiefly to accompany the drum in military music.
pigpecker
The European garden warbler (Sylvia, / Currica, hortensis); -- called also beccafico and greater pettychaps.
figgum
A juggler's trick; conjuring.
figaro
An adroit and unscrupulous intriguer.
figeater
A large beetle (Allorhina nitida) which in the Southern United States destroys figs.  The elytra are velvety green with pale borders.
fight
To act in opposition to anything; to struggle against; to contend; to strive; to make resistance.
figment
An invention; a fiction; something feigned or imagined.
fijian
Of or pertaining to the Fiji islands or their inhabitants.
figulated
Made of potter's clay; molded; shaped.
figwort
A genus of herbaceous plants (Scrophularia), mostly found in the north temperate zones. See Brownwort.
filch
To steal or take privily (commonly, that which is of little value); to pilfer.
filaceous
Composed of threads.
file
An orderly succession; a line; a row
flabbily
In a flabby manner.
firm
Fixed; hence, closely compressed; compact; substantial; hard; solid; -- applied to the matter of bodies; as, firm flesh; firm muscles, firm wood.
finger
One of the five terminating members of the hand; a digit; esp., one of the four extermities of the hand, other than the thumb.
finable
Liable or subject to a fine; as, a finable person or offense.
filoplume
A hairlike feather; a father with a slender scape and without a web in most or all of its length.
fill
One of the thills or shafts of a carriage.
film
A thin skin; a pellicle; a membranous covering, causing opacity; hence, any thin, slight covering.
filter
To purify or defecate, as water or other liquid, by causing it to pass through a filter.
fimbria
A fringe, or fringed border.
find
To learn by experience or trial; to perceive; to experience; to discover by the intellect or the feelings; to detect; to feel.
finback
Any whale of the genera Sibbaldius, Balaenoptera, and allied genera, of the family Balaenopteridae, characterized by a prominent fin on the back.
finch
A small singing bird of many genera and species, belonging to the family Fringillidae.
fine
Finished; brought to perfection; refined; hence, free from impurity; excellent; superior; elegant; worthy of admiration; accomplished; beautiful.
finfish
A finback whale.
fint
3d pers. sing. pr. of Find, for findeth.
finn
A native of Finland; one of the Finn/ in the ethnological sense. See Finns.
finical
Affectedly fine; overnice; unduly particular; fastidious.
finlander
A native or inhabitant of Finland.
finos
Second best wool from Merino sheep.
finpike
The bichir. See Crossopterygii.
fire
The evolution of light and heat in the combustion of bodies; combustion; state of ignition.
fiord
A narrow inlet of the sea, penetrating between high banks or rocks, as on the coasts of Norway and Alaska.
fipple
A stopper, as in a wind instrument of music.
firing
The act of disharging firearms.
firk
To beat; to strike; to chastise.
fitly
In a fit manner; suitably; properly; conveniently; as, a maxim fitly applied.
fish
A counter, used in various games.
firth
An arm of the sea; a frith.
firry
Made of fir; abounding in firs.
first
Preceding all others of a series or kind; the ordinal of one; earliest; as, the first day of a month; the first year of a reign.
fisc
A public or state treasury.
fisetic
Pertaining to fustet or fisetin.
fist
The hand with the fingers doubled into the palm; the closed hand, especially as clinched tightly for the purpose of striking a blow.
fisk
To run about; to frisk; to whisk.
fissile
Capable of being split, cleft, or divided in the direction of the grain, like wood, or along natural planes of cleavage, like crystals.
fitch
A word found in the Authorized Version of the Bible, representing different Hebrew originals. In Isaiah xxviii.
fitful
Full of fits; irregularly variable; impulsive and unstable.
fixable
Capable of being fixed.
fittedness
The state or quality of being fitted; adaptation.
fitment
The act of fitting; that which is proper or becoming; equipment.
fitness
The state or quality of being fit; as, the fitness of measures or laws; a person's fitness for office.
fitweed
A plant (Eryngium foetidum) supposed to be a remedy for fits.
five
Four and one added; one more than four.
fixture
State of being fixed; fixedness.
fixed
Securely placed or fastened; settled; established; firm; imovable; unalterable.
fixing
The act or process of making fixed.
fizgig
A firework, made of damp powder, which makes a fizzing or hissing noise when it explodes.
fixure
Fixed position; stable condition; firmness.
fizz
To make a hissing sound, as a burning fuse.
flesh
The aggregate of the muscles, fat, and other tissues which cover the framework of bones in man and other animals; especially, the muscles.
flavescent
Turning yellow; yellowish.
flanch
A bearing consisting of a segment of a circle encroaching on the field from the side.
flail
An ancient military weapon, like the common flail, often having the striking part armed with rows of spikes, or loaded.
flaccid
Yielding to pressure for want of firmness and stiffness; soft and weak; limber; lax; drooping; flabby; as, a flaccid muscle; flaccid flesh.
flag
To hang loose without stiffness; to bend down, as flexible bodies; to be loose, yielding, limp.
flake
A paling; a hurdle.
flam
A freak or whim; also, a falsehood; a lie; an illusory pretext; deception; delusion.
flash
To burst or break forth with a sudden and transient flood of flame and light; as, the lighting flashes vividly; the powder flashed.
flap
Anything broad and limber that hangs loose, or that is attached by one side or end and is easily moved; as, the flap of a garment.
flare
To burn with an unsteady or waving flame; as, the candle flares.
flat
Having an even and horizontal surface, or nearly so, without prominences or depressions; level without inclination; plane.
flaunt
To throw or spread out; to flutter; to move ostentatiously; as, a flaunting show.
fled
Imp. & p. p. of Flee.
flay
To skin; to strip off the skin or surface of; as, to flay an ox; to flay the green earth.
flaw
A crack or breach; a gap or fissure; a defect of continuity or cohesion; as, a flaw in a knife or a vase.
flax
A plant of the genus Linum, esp. the L. usitatissimum, which has a single, slender stalk, about a foot and a half high, with blue flowers.
flea
An insect belonging to the genus Pulex, of the order Aphaniptera. Fleas are destitute of wings, but have the power of leaping energetically.
fleche
A simple fieldwork, consisting of two faces forming a salient angle pointing outward and open at the gorge.
fleeringly
In a fleering manner.
flee
To run away, as from danger or evil; to avoid in an alarmed or cowardly manner; to hasten off; -- usually with from.
flear
A word or look of derision or mockery.
fleme
To banish; to drive out; to expel.
flense
To strip the blubber or skin from, as from a whale, seal, etc.
flip
A mixture of beer, spirit, etc., stirred and heated by a hot iron.
flick
To whip lightly or with a quick jerk; to flap; as, to flick a horse; to flick the dirt from boots.
flewed
Having large flews.
fletch
To feather, as an arrow.
fleury
Finished at the ends with fleurs-de-lis; -- said esp. of a cross so decorated.
flex
To bend; as, to flex the arm.
flibustier
A buccaneer; an American pirate. See Flibuster.
flight
The act or flying; a passing through the air by the help of wings; volitation; mode or style of flying.
flidge
Fledged; fledge.
flier
One who flies or flees; a runaway; a fugitive.
flimflam
A freak; a trick; a lie.
flinch
To let the foot slip from a ball, when attempting to give a tight croquet.
flobert
A small cartridge designed for target shooting; -- sometimes called ball cap.
flit
To move with celerity through the air; to fly away with a rapid motion; to dart along; to fleet; as, a bird flits away; a cloud flits along.
flirt
To throw with a jerk or quick effort; to fling suddenly; as, they flirt water in each other's faces; he flirted a glove, or a handkerchief.
flisk
To frisk; to skip; to caper.
flix
The flux; dysentery.
float
A mass of timber or boards fastened together, and conveyed down a stream by the current; a raft.
flog
To beat or strike with a rod or whip; to whip; to lash; to chastise with repeated blows.
floccose
Spotted with small tufts like wool.
floe
A low, flat mass of floating ice.
flood
The flowing in of the tide; the semidiurnal swell or rise of water in the ocean; -- opposed to ebb; as, young flood; high flood.
flong
Imp. & p. p. of Fling.
flop
To clap or strike, as a bird its wings, a fish its tail, etc.; to flap.
full
Sated; surfeited.
foxhound
One of a special breed of hounds used for chasing foxes.
folks
In Anglo-Saxon times, the people of a group of townships or villages; a community; a tribe.
flyfish
A California scorpaenoid fish (Sebastichthys rhodochloris), having brilliant colors.
fluke
The European flounder.  See Flounder.
fluavil
A hydrocarbon extracted from gutta-percha, as a yellow, resinous substance; -- called also fluanil.
flounce
The act of floucing; a sudden, jerking motion of the body.
flosculous
Consisting of many gamopetalous florets.
flotage
The state of floating.
flow
Imp. sing. of Fly, v. i.
floyte
A variant of Flute.
fluff
Nap or down; flue; soft, downy feathers.
flucan
Soft clayey matter in the vein, or surrounding it.
flue
An inclosed passage way for establishing and directing a current of air, gases, etc.; an air passage
flugel
A grand piano or a harpsichord, both being wing-shaped.
fluid
A fluid substance; a body whose particles move easily among themselves.
flute
A similar channel or groove made in wood or other material, esp. in plaited cloth, as in a lady's ruffle.
fluoborate
A salt of fluoboric acid; a fluoboride.
fluminous
Pertaining to rivers; abounding in streama.
flung
Imp. & p. p. of Fling.
flurried
Agitated; excited.
flush
To flow and spread suddenly; to rush; as, blood flushes into the face.
flybane
A kind of catchfly of the genus Silene; also, a poisonous mushroom (Agaricus muscarius); fly agaric.
fluvial
Belonging to rivers; growing or living in streams or ponds; as, a fluvial plant.
flux
The act of flowing; a continuous moving on or passing by, as of a flowing stream; constant succession; change.
flycatcher
One of numerous species of birds that feed upon insects, which they take on the wing.
flyer
One that uses wings.
fodient
Fitted for, or pertaining to, digging.
foal
The young of any animal of the Horse family (Equidae); a colt; a filly.
flysch
A name given to the series of sandstones and schists overlying the true nummulitic formation in the Alps, and included in the Eocene Tertiary.
flying
Moving in the air with, or as with, wings; moving lightly or rapidly; intended for rapid movement.
flyman
The driver of a fly, or light public carriage.
flytrap
A trap for catching flies.
fnese
To breathe heavily; to snort.
focimeter
An assisting instrument for focusing an object in or before a camera.
foam
To gather foam; to froth; as, the billows foam.
focal
Belonging to,or concerning, a focus; as, a focal point.
focus
A point in which the rays of light meet, after being reflected or refrcted, and at which the image is formed; as, the focus of a lens or mirror.
fodder
A weight by which lead and some other metals were formerly sold, in England, varying from 19/ to 24 cwt.
fohist
A Buddhist priest. See Fo.
foggily
In a foggy manner; obscurely.
foeman
An enemy in war.
foge
The Cornish name for a forge used for smelting tin.
fogless
Without fog; clear.
fogy
A dull old fellow; a person behind the times, over-conservative, or slow; -- usually preceded by old.
foin
The beech marten (Mustela foina). See Marten.
foible
A moral weakness; a failing; a weak point; a frailty.
foil
To tread under foot; to trample.
fold
To lap or lay in plaits or folds; to lay one part over another part of; to double; as, to fold cloth; to fold a letter.
foison
Rich harvest; plenty; abundance.
foliaceous
Belonging to, or having the texture or nature of, a leaf; having leaves intermixed with flowers; as, a foliaceous spike.
forpass
To pass by or along; to pass over.
forage
The act of foraging; search for provisions, etc.
fonly
Foolishly; fondly.
foment
To apply a warm lotion to; to bathe with a cloth or sponge wet with warm water or medicated liquid.
follicle
A simple podlike pericarp which contains several seeds and opens along the inner or ventral suture, as in the peony, larkspur and milkweed.
fomalhaut
A star of the first magnitude, in the constellation Piscis Australis, or Southern Fish.
fond
Imp. of Find.  Found.
fonge
To take; to receive.
fool
A compound of gooseberries scalded and crushed, with cream; -- commonly called gooseberry fool.
font
A fountain; a spring; a source.
food
Anything that instructs the intellect, excites the feelings, or molds habits of character; that which nourishes.
foot
That which corresponds to the foot of a man or animal; as, the foot of a table; the foot of a stocking.
foppery
The behavior, dress, or other indication of a fop; coxcombry; affectation of show; showy folly.
forgather
To convene; to gossip; to meet accidentally.
ford
A place in a river, or other water, where it may be passed by man or beast on foot, by wading.
forbear
An ancestor; a forefather; -- usually in the plural.
forcarve
To cut completely; to cut off.
fore
Journey; way; method of proceeding.
forfeit
Injury; wrong; mischief.
forlaft
P. p. of Forleave.
forhall
To harass; to torment; to distress.
fork
Anything furcate or like a fork in shape, or furcate at the extremity; as, a tuning fork.
form
Constitution; mode of construction, organization, etc.; system; as, a republican form of government.
fornical
Relating to a fornix.
foul
Scurrilous; obscene or profane; abusive; as, foul words; foul language.
foryelde
To repay; to requite.
fortalice
A small outwork of a fortification; a fortilage; -- called also fortelace.
forray
To foray; to ravage; to pillage.
forsake
To quit or leave entirely; to desert; to abandon; to depart or withdraw from; to leave; as, false friends and flatterers forsake us in adversity.
forum
A market place or public place in Rome, where causes were judicially tried, and orations delivered to the people.
forwaked
Tired out with excessive waking or watching.
fother
A wagonload; a load of any sort.
fossane
A species of civet (Viverra fossa) resembling the genet.
foster
To feed; to nourish; to support; to bring up.
fotmal
Seventy pounds of lead.
fougasse
A small mine, in the form of a well sunk from the surface of the ground, charged with explosive and projectiles.
fovea
A slight depression or pit; a fossa.
four
One more than three; twice two.
foumart
The European polecat; -- called also European ferret, and fitchew. See Polecat.
found
Imp. & p. p. of Find.
foussa
A viverrine animal of Madagascar (Cryptoprocta ferox). It resembles a cat in size and form, and has retractile claws.
fouter
A despicable fellow.
foxearth
A hole in the earth to which a fox resorts to hide himself.
fovilla
One of the fine granules contained in the protoplasm of a pollen grain.
fowl
Any bird; esp., any large edible bird.
foxed
Discolored or stained; -- said of timber, and also of the paper of books or engravings.
fracas
An uproar; a noisy quarrel; a disturbance; a brawl.
foxfish
The fox shark; -- called also sea fox. See Thrasher shark, under Shark.
frit
The material of which glass is made, after having been calcined or partly fused in a furnace, but before vitrification.
free
Liberated, by arriving at a certain age, from the control of parents, guardian, or master.
fragile
Easily broken; brittle; frail; delicate; easily destroyed.
foyer
A lobby in a theater; a greenroom.
foxship
Foxiness; craftiness.
foxiness
The state or quality of being foxy, or foxlike; craftiness; shrewdness.
foxlike
Resembling a fox in his characteristic qualities; cunning; artful; foxy.
foxtail
The tail or brush of a fox.
foxy
Like or pertaining to the fox; foxlike in disposition or looks; wily.
frab
To scold; to nag.
foziness
The state of being fozy; spiritlessness; dullness.
fozy
Spongy; soft; fat and puffy.
fraction
The act of breaking, or state of being broken, especially by violence.
frenum
A connecting fold of membrane serving to support or restrain any part; as, the fraenum of the tongue.
fraud
An intentional perversion of truth for the purpose of obtaining some valuable thing or promise from another.
franc
A silver coin of France, and since 1795 the unit of the French monetary system. It has been adopted by Belgium and Swizerland.
frail
A basket made of rushes, used chiefly for containing figs and raisins.
framable
Capable of being framed.
frap
To brace by drawing together, as the cords of a drum.
frater
A monk; also, a frater house.
freak
To variegate; to checker; to streak.
fraxinus
A genus of deciduous forest trees, found in the north temperate zone, and including the true ash trees.
fray
Affray; broil; contest; combat.
freck
To checker; to diversify.
fred
Peace; -- a word used in composition, especially in proper names; as, Alfred; Frederic.
ftiction
The resistance which a body meets with from the surface on which it moves. It may be resistance to sliding motion, or to rolling motion.
fret
To impair; to wear away; to diminish.
french
Of or pertaining to France or its inhabitants.
freight
That with which anything in fraught or laden for transportation; lading; cargo, especially of a ship, or a car on a railroad, etc.
fremed
Strange; foreign.
frequence
A crowd; a throng; a concourse.
frescade
A cool walk; shady place.
fricace
Meat sliced and dressed with strong sauce.
friabiiity
The quality of being friable; friableness.
frible
Frivolous; trifling; sily.
frlcassee
To dress like a fricassee.
fricative
A fricative consonant letter or sound. See Guide to Pronunciation, // 197-206, etc.
prigidity
The condition or quality of being frigid; coldness; want of warmth.
frithstool
A seat in churches near the altar, to which offenders formerly fled for sanctuary.
frictional
Relating to friction; moved by friction; produced by friction; as, frictional electricity.
friday
The sixth day of the week, following Thursday and preceding Saturday.
fried
Imp. & p. p. of Fry.
frigate
Any small vessel on the water.
frim
Flourishing; thriving; fresh; in good case; vigorous.
frigidly
In a frigid manner; coldly; dully; without affection.
frill
To shake or shiver as with cold; as, the hawk frills.
fripper
One who deals in frippery or in old clothes.
fringe
Something resembling in any respect a fringe; a line of objects along a border or edge; a border; an edging; a margin; a confine.
frisian
Of or pertaining to Friesland, a province of the Netherlands; Friesic.
frying
The process denoted by the verb fry.
frost
The act of freezing; -- applied chiefly to the congelation of water; congelation of fluids.
froise
A kind of pancake. See 1st Fraise.
frock
A coarse gown worn by monks or friars, and supposed to take the place of all, or nearly all, other garments.
frivolity
The condition or quality of being frivolous; also, acts or habits of trifling; unbecoming levity of disposition.
friz
To curl or form into small curls, as hair, with a crisping pin; to crisp.
froe
A dirty woman; a slattern; a frow.
frog
An amphibious animal of the genus Rana and related genera, of many species. Frogs swim rapidly, and take long leaps on land.
frondation
The act of stripping, as trees, of leaves or branches; a kind of pruning.
frolic
Full of levity; dancing, playing, or frisking about; full of pranks; frolicsome; gay; merry.
fromwards
A way from; -- the contrary of toward.
froppish
Peevish; froward.
frory
Frozen; stiff with cold.
fructed
Bearing fruit; -- said of a tree or plant so represented upon an escutcheon.
frow
A woman; especially, a Dutch or German woman.
frote
To rub or wear by rubbing; to chafe.
frounce
To gather into or adorn with plaits, as a dress; to form wrinkles in or upon; to curl or frizzle, as the hair.
frozen
Congealed with cold; affected by freezing; as, a frozen brook.
frubish
To rub up: to furbish.
frumenty
Food made of hulled wheat boiled in milk, with sugar, plums, etc.
frugal
Obtained by, or appropriate to, economy; as, a frugal fortune.
fruit
Whatever is produced for the nourishment or enjoyment of man or animals by the processes of vegetable growth, as corn, grass, cotton, flax, etc.
frush
To batter; to break in pieces.
frutage
A picture of fruit; decoration by representation of fruit.
fuel
Any matter used to produce heat by burning; that which feeds fire; combustible matter used for fires, as wood, coal, peat, etc.
fucivorous
Eating fucus or other seaweeds.
fubsy
Plump; chubby; short and stuffy; as a fubsy sofa.
fubs
A plump young person or child.
fubbery
Cheating; deception.
fucated
Painted; disguised with paint, or with false show.
fuchs
A student of the first year.
fudder
See Fodder, a weight.
fucoid
In a vague sense, resembling seaweeds, or of the nature of seaweeds.
fucus
A paint; a dye; also, false show.
fudge
A made-up story; stuff; nonsense; humbug; -- often an exclamation of contempt.
fuegian
Of or pertaining to Terra del Fuego.
fugue
A polyphonic composition, developed from a given theme or themes, according to strict contrapuntal rules.
fugh
An exclamation of disgust; foh; faugh.
fuero
A code; a charter; a grant of privileges.
fugacious
Flying, or disposed to fly; fleeing away; lasting but a short time; volatile.
fugitive
Fleeing from pursuit, danger, restraint, etc., escaping, from service, duty etc.; as, a fugitive solder; a fugitive slave; a fugitive debtor.
fugle
To maneuver; to move hither and thither.
fulciment
A prop; a fulcrum.
foolahs
A peculiar African race of uncertain origin, but distinct from the negro tribes, inhabiting an extensive region of Western Soudan.
fuldble
Capable of being propped up.
fulgency
Brightness; splendor; glitter; effulgence.
fulfill
To fill up; to make full or complete.
fuliginous
Pertaining to soot; sooty; dark; dusky.
gamba
A viola da gamba.
fust
A strong, musty smell; mustiness.
furacious
Given to theft; thievish.
fumosity
The fumes of drink.
fume
Exhalation; volatile matter (esp. noxious vapor or smoke) ascending in a dense body; smoke; vapor; reek; as, the fumes of tobacco.
fulvous
Tawny; dull yellow, with a mixture of gray and brown.
fulmar
One of several species of sea birds, of the family procellariidae, allied to the albatrosses and petrels.
fulsome
Full; abundant; plenteous; not shriveled.
fumacious
Smoky; hence, fond of smoking; addicted to smoking tobacco.
fumble
To feel or grope about; to make awkward attempts to do or find something.
fuming
Producing fumes, or vapors.
fumid
Smoky; vaporous.
fumlly
Smokily; with fume.
famish
Smoky; hot; choleric.
fumishness
Choler; fretfulness; passion.
fundus
The bottom or base of any hollow organ; as, the fundus of the bladder; the fundus of the eye.
function
The act of executing or performing any duty, office, or calling; per formance.
fumy
Producing fumes; fumous.
funambulus
A ropewalker or ropedancer.
fund
An aggregation or deposit of resources from which supplies are or may be drawn for carrying on any work, or for maintaining existence.
funuless
Destitute of funds.
funicle
A small cord, ligature, or fiber.
funebrial
Pertaining to a funeral or funerals; funeral; funereal.
fungal
Of or pertaining to fungi.
funk
An offensive smell; a stench.
funnel
A vessel of the shape of an inverted hollow cone, terminating below in a pipe, and used for conveying liquids into a close vessel; a tunnel.
further
To a greater distance; in addition; moreover. See Farther.
furfur
Scurf; dandruff.
furbish
To rub or scour to brightness; to clean; to burnish; as, to furbish a sword or spear.
furbelow
A plaited or gathered flounce on a woman's garment.
furhelow
To put a furbelow on; to ornament.
furcated
Forked; branching like a fork; as, furcate twigs.
furdle
To draw up into a bundle; to roll up.
furnace
A place or time of punishment, affiction, or great trial; severe experience or discipline.
furial
Furious; raging; tormenting.
furlong
A measure of length; the eighth part of a mile; forty rods; two hundred and twenty yards.
furoin
A colorless, crystalline substance, C10H8O4, from furfurol.
furrier
A dealer in furs; one who makes or sells fur goods.
furzechat
The whinchat; -- called also furzechuck.
furuncle
A superficial, inflammatory tumor, suppurating with a central core; a boil.
fartherer
One who furthers. or helps to advance; a promoter.
furthest
Superl. Most remote; most in advance; farthest. See Further, a.
faruncular
Of or pertaining to a furuncle; marked by the presence of furuncles.
fury
Violent or extreme excitement; overmastering agitation or enthusiasm.
fuse
To liquefy by heat; to render fiuid; to dissolve; to melt.
fusain
Fine charcoal of willow wood, used as a drawing implement.
fuscation
A darkening; obscurity; obfuscation.
fusome
Handy; reat; handsome; notable.
fusibility
The quality of being fusible.
fuss
A tumult; a bustle; unnecessary or annoying ado about trifles.
gadling
A roving vagabond.
gabarage
A kind of coarse cloth for packing goods.
futurable
Capable of being future; possible to occur.
fussure
Act of fusing; fusion.
fusiness
A fusty state or quality; moldiness; mustiness; an ill smell from moldiness.
fusty
Moldy; musty; ill-smelling; rank.
futchel
The jaws between which the hinder end of a carriage tongue is inserted.
futile
Talkative; loquacious; tattling.
fyke
A long bag net distended by hoops, into which fish can pass easily, without being able to return; -- called also fyke net.
fuze
A tube, filled with combustible matter, for exploding a shell, etc. See Fuse, n.
fuzz
Fine, light particles or fibers; loose, volatile matter.
fyllot
A rebated cross, formerly used as a secret emblem, and a common ornament. It is also called gammadion, and swastika.
fyrdung
The military force of the whole nation, consisting of all men able to bear arms.
gaby
A simpleton; a dunce; a lout.
gabel
A rent, service, tribute, custom, tax, impost, or duty; an excise.
gaberdine
A coarse frock or loose upper garment formerly worn by Jews; a mean dress.
gabber
A liar; a deceiver.
gabion
An openwork frame, as of poles, filled with stones and sunk, to assist in forming a bar dyke, etc., as in harbor improvement.
gable
The vertical triangular portion of the end of a building, from the level of the cornice or eaves to the ridge of the roof.
gadfly
Any dipterous insect of the genus Oestrus, and allied genera of botflies.
gadder
One who roves about idly, a rambling gossip.
gade
A small British fish (Motella argenteola) of the Cod family.
gadhelic
Of or pertaining to that division of the Celtic languages, which includes the Irish, Gaelic, and Manx.
gadic
Pertaining to, or derived from, the cod (Gadus); -- applied to an acid obtained from cod-liver oil, viz.
gaillard
Gay; brisk; merry; galliard.
gaff
A barbed spear or a hook with a handle, used by fishermen in securing heavy fish.
gaduin
A yellow or brown amorphous substance, of indifferent nature, found in cod-liver oil.
gadoid
Of or pertaining to the family of fishes (Gadidae) which includes the cod, haddock, and hake.
gadsman
One who uses a gad or goad in driving.
gadwall
A large duck (Anas strepera), valued as a game bird, found in the northern parts of Europe and America; -- called also gray duck.
gael
A Celt or the Celts of the Scotch Highlands or of Ireland; now esp., a Scotch Highlander of Celtic origin.
gagtooth
A projecting tooth.
gage
A variety of plum; as, the greengage; also, the blue gage, frost gage, golden gage, etc., having more or less likeness to the greengage.
gagger
A piece of iron imbedded in the sand of a mold to keep the sand in place.
gahnite
Zinc spinel; automolite.
gaidic
Pertaining to hypogeic acid; -- applied to an acid obtained from hypogeic acid.
galician
Of or pertaining to Galicia, in Spain, or to Galicia, the kingdom of Austrian Poland.
gala
Pomp, show, or festivity.
gain
Convenient; suitable; direct; near; handy; dexterous; easy; profitable; cheap; respectable.
gait
A going; a walk; a march; a way.
galbanum
A gum resin exuding from the stems of certain Asiatic umbelliferous plants, mostly species of Ferula.
gale
A strong current of air; a wind between a stiff breeze and a hurricane. The most violent gales are called tempests.
galpe
To gape,; to yawn.
gall
The gall bladder.
galoshe
A clog or patten.
galvanic
Of or pertaining to, or exhibiting the phenomena of, galvanism; employing or producing electrical currents.
galsome
Angry; malignant.
gamashes
High boots or buskins; in Scotland, short spatterdashes or riding trousers, worn over the other clothing.
gaul
The Anglicized form of Gallia, which in the time of the Romans included France and Upper Italy (Transalpine and Cisalpine Gaul).
garland
The crown of a king.
ganoid
Of or pertaining to Ganoidei. -- n. One of the Ganoidei.
gander
The male of any species of goose.
gamma
The third letter (/, / = Eng. G) of the Greek alphabet.
game
Crooked; lame; as, a game leg.
gamic
Pertaining to, or resulting from, sexual connection; formed by the union of the male and female elements.
gamy
Having the flavor of game, esp. of game kept uncooked till near the condition of tainting; high-flavored.
ganch
To drop from a high place upon sharp stakes or hooks, as the Turks dropped malefactors, by way of punishment.
ganil
A kind of brittle limestone.
gane
To yawn; to gape.
gang
A going; a course.
ganja
The dried hemp plant, used in India for smoking. It is extremely narcotic and intoxicating.
gannet
One of several species of sea birds of the genus Sula, allied to the pelicans.
garb
Clothing in general.
gaol
A place of confinement, especially for minor offenses or provisional imprisonment; a jail.
gantlet
A glove. See Gauntlet.
ganza
A kind of wild goose, by a flock of which a virtuoso was fabled to be carried to the lunar world.
gape
To open the mouth wide
garancin
An extract of madder by sulphuric acid. It consists essentially of alizarin.
garfish
One of several species of similar fishes of the genus Tylosurus, of which one species (T. marinus) is common on the Atlantic coast.
gardant
Turning the head towards the spectator, but not the body; -- said of a lion or other beast.
gare
Coarse wool on the legs of sheep.
gargalize
To gargle; to rinse.
garibaldi
A jacket worn by women; -- so called from its resemblance in shape to the red shirt worn by the Italians patriot Garibaldi.
gasiform
Having a form of gas; gaseous.
garum
A sauce made of small fish. It was prized by the ancients.
garookuh
A small fishing vessel met with in the Persian Gulf.
garment
Any article of clothing, as a coat, a gown, etc.
garner
A granary; a building or place where grain is stored for preservation.
garret
A turret; a watchtower.
garter
A band used to prevent a stocking from slipping down on the leg.
gascon
Of or pertaining to Gascony, in France, or to the Gascons; also, braggart; swaggering.
garvie
The sprat; -- called also garvie herring, and garvock.
gasalier
A chandelier arranged to burn gas.
gaseity
State of being gaseous.
gash
To make a gash, or long, deep incision in; -- applied chiefly to incisions in flesh.
gast
To make aghast; to frighten; to terrify. See Aghast.
gasogen
An apparatus for the generation of gases, or for impregnating a liquid with a gas, or a gas with a volatile liquid.
gasket
A line or band used to lash a furled sail securely. Sea gaskets are common lines; harbor gaskets are plaited and decorated lines or bands.
gaslight
The light yielded by the combustion of illuminating gas.
gasp
To open the mouth wide in catching the breath, or in laborious respiration; to labor for breath; to respire convulsively; to pant violently.
gasserian
Relating to Casserio (L. Gasserius), the discover of the Gasserian ganglion.
gauche
Left handed; hence, awkward; clumsy.
gate
A large door or passageway in the wall of a city, of an inclosed field or place, or of a grand edifice, etc.
gather
To bring together; to collect, as a number of separate things, into one place, or into one aggregate body; to assemble; to muster; to congregate.
gauffer
To plait, crimp, or flute; to goffer, as lace. See Goffer.
gaud
Trick; jest; sport.
gauge
To measure or determine with a gauge.
geering
See Gear, Gearing.
gayety
Finery; show; as, the gayety of dress.
gavot
A kind of difficult dance; a dance tune, the air of which has two brisk and lively, yet dignified, strains in common time, each played twice over.
gauze
A very thin, slight, transparent stuff, generally of silk; also, any fabric resembling silk gauze; as, wire gauze; cotton gauze.
gaunt
Attenuated, as with fasting or suffering; lean; meager; pinched and grim.
gaur
An East Indian species of wild cattle (Bibos gauris), of large size and an untamable disposition.
gavel
A small heap of grain, not tied up into a bundle.
gaviae
The division of birds which includes the gulls and terns.
gawn
A small tub or lading vessel.
gawby
A baby; a dunce.
gawk
A simpleton; a booby; a gawky.
gayal
A Southern Asiatic species of wild cattle (Bibos frontalis).
gaydiang
A vessel of Anam, with two or three masts, lofty triangular sails, and in construction somewhat resembling a Chinese junk.
gean
A species of cherry tree common in Europe (Prunus avium); also, the fruit, which is usually small and dark in color.
gaytre
The dogwood tree.
gaylussite
A yellowish white, translucent mineral, consisting of the carbonates of lime and soda, with water.
gaysome
Full of gayety. Mir. for Mag.
gaze
To fixx the eyes in a steady and earnest look; to look with eagerness or curiosity, as in admiration, astonishment, or with studious attention.
gazogene
A portable apparatus for making soda water or aerated liquids on a small scale.
geat
The channel or spout through which molten metal runs into a mold in casting.
gear
Clothing; garments; ornaments.
geason
Rare; wonderful.
geck
Scorn, derision, or contempt.
gedd
The European pike.
geminate
In pairs or twains; two together; binate; twin; as, geminate flowers.
gelid
Cold; very cold; frozen.
geic
Pertaining to, or derived from, earthy or vegetable mold.
geest
Alluvial matter on the surface of land, not of recent origin.
geez
The original native name for the ancient Ethiopic language or people. See Ethiopic.
gelable
Capable of being congealed; capable of being converted into jelly.
geld
Money; tribute; compensation; ransom.
gelt
Gilding; tinsel.
geloscopy
Divination by means of laughter.
gelsemine
An alkaloid obtained from the yellow jasmine (Gelsemium sempervirens), as a bitter white semicrystalline substance; -- called also gelsemia.
gemara
The second part of the Talmud, or the commentary on the Mishna (which forms the first part or text).
gemel
Coupled; paired.
gendarme
One of a body of heavy cavalry.
gemsbok
A South African antelope (Oryx Capensis), having long, sharp, nearly straight horns.
gemma
A leaf bud, as distinguished from a flower bud.
gemote
A meeting; -- used in combination, as, Witenagemote, an assembly of the wise men.
gemul
A small South American deer (Furcifer Chilensis), with simple forked horns.
gena
The cheek; the feathered side of the under mandible of a bird.
genoese
Of or pertaining to Genoa, a city of Italy.
genealogy
Regular descent of a person or family from a progenitor; pedigree; lineage.
genial
Contributing to, or concerned in, propagation or production; generative; procreative; productive.
gens
A minor subdivision of a tribe, among American aborigines. It includes those who have a common descent, and bear the same totem.
genre
A style of painting, sculpture, or other imitative art, which illustrates everyday life and manners.
gent
Gentle; noble; of gentle birth.
hunk
A large lump or piece; a hunch; as, a hunk of bread.
haggada
A story, anecdote, or legend in the Talmud, to explain or illustrate the text of the Old Testament.
gomphiasis
A disease of the teeth, which causes them to loosen and fall out of their sockets.
glass
Any substance having a peculiar glassy appearance, and a conchoidal fracture, and usually produced by fusion.
gieseckite
A mineral occurring in greenish gray six-sided prisms, having a greasy luster. It is probably a pseudomorph after elaeolite.
gewgaw
A showy trifle; a toy; a splendid plaything; a pretty but worthless bauble.
gerbe
A kind of ornamental firework.
geophagism
The act or habit of eating earth. See Dirt eating, under Dirt.
geognosis
Knowledge of the earth.
geocronite
A lead-gray or grayish blue mineral with a metallic luster, consisting of sulphur, antimony, and lead, with a small proportion of arsenic.
geode
A nodule of stone, containing a cavity, lined with crystals or mineral matter.
geolatry
The worship of the earth.
geomalism
The tendency of an organism to respond, during its growth, to the force of gravitation.
geotic
Belonging to earth; terrestrial.
georama
A hollow globe on the inner surface of which a map of the world is depicted, to be examined by one standing inside.
geoscopy
Knowledge of the earth, ground, or soil, obtained by inspection.
gephyrea
An order of marine Annelida, in which the body is imperfectly, or not at all, annulated externally, and is mostly without setae.
gerah
A small coin and weight; 1-20th of a shekel.
gerocomy
That part of medicine which treats of regimen for old people.
gerlind
A salmon returning from the sea the second time.
gerent
Bearing; carrying.
gerful
Changeable; capricious.
germ
That from which anything springs; origin; first principle; as, the germ of civil liberty.
gern
To grin or yawn.
gest
Something done or achieved; a deed or an action; an adventure.
gerund
A kind of verbal noun, having only the four oblique cases of the singular number, and governing cases like a participle.
gery
Changeable; fickle.
geth
The original third pers. sing. pres. of Go.
gettable
That may be obtained.
ghyll
A ravine. See Gill a woody glen.
ghee
Butter clarified by boiling, and thus converted into a kind of oil.
ghast
To strike aghast; to affright.
geyser
A boiling spring which throws forth at frequent intervals jets of water, mud, etc., driven up by the expansive power of steam.
gharry
Any wheeled cart or carriage.
ghaut
A pass through a mountain.
ghawazi
Egyptian dancing girls, of a lower sort than the almeh.
ghibelline
One of a faction in Italy, in the 12th and 13th centuries, which favored the German emperors, and opposed the Guelfs, or adherents of the poses.
gherkin
A kind of small, prickly cucumber, much used for pickles.
ghetto
The Jews'quarter in an Italian town or city.
ghost
The spirit; the soul of man.
ghoul
An imaginary evil being among Eastern nations, which was supposed to feed upon human bodies.
gibe
To cast reproaches and sneering expressions; to rail; to utter taunting, sarcastic words; to flout; to fleer; to scoff.
giant
A man of extraordinari bulk and stature.
giallolino
A term variously employed by early writers on art, though commonly designating the yellow oxide of lead, or massicot.
giambeux
Greaves; armor for the legs.
giaour
An infidel; -- a term applied by Turks to disbelievers in the Mohammedan religion, especially Christrians.
gibbartas
One of several finback whales of the North Atlantic; -- called also Jupiter whale.
giblet
Made of giblets; as, a giblet pie.
gibfish
The male of the salmon.
gibingly
In a gibing manner; scornfully.
gibstaff
A staff to guage water, or to push a boat.
giddily
In a giddy manner.
ginshop
A shop or barroom where gin is sold as a beverage.
gilour
A guiler; deceiver.
giggle
To laugh with short catches of the breath or voice; to laugh in a light, affected, or silly manner; to titter with childish levity.
gigantean
Like a giant; mighty; gigantic.
giffgaff
Mutial accommodation; mutual giving.
gift
Anything given; anything voluntarily transferred by one person to another without compensation; a present; an offering.
guide
The leather strap by which the shield of a knight was slung across the shoulder, or across the neck and shoulder.
gigerium
The muscular stomach, or gizzard, of birds.
gild
To overlay with a thin covering of gold; to cover with a golden color; to cause to look like gold.
giglet
A wanton; a lascivious or light, giddy girl.
giggot
A leg of mutton.
guilding
The art or practice of overlaying or covering with gold leaf; also, a thin coating or wash of gold, or of that which resembles gold.
gill
An organ for aquatic respiration; a branchia.
gimmor
A piece of mechanism; mechanical device or contrivance; a gimcrack.
gimlet
A small tool for boring holes. It has a leading screw, a grooved body, and a cross handle.
gilt
A female pig, when young.
gimcrack
A trivial mechanism; a device; a toy; a pretty thing.
gimmal
Joined work whose parts move within each other; a pair or series of interlocked rings.
gommal
Made or consisting of interlocked ring/ or links; as, gimmal mail.
ginhouse
A building where cotton is ginned.
gimp
Smart; spruce; trim; nice.
ginger
A plant of the genus Zingiber, of the East and West Indies. The species most known is Z. officinale.
ginkgo
A large ornamental tree (Ginkgo biloba) from China and Japan, belonging to the Yew suborder of Coniferae.
ginnet
See Genet, a horse.
gith
The corn cockle; also anciently applied to the Nigella, or fennel flower.
girondist
Of or pertaining to the Girondists.
giraffe
An African ruminant (Camelopardalis giraffa) related to the deers and antelopes, but placed in a family by itself; the camelopard.
gipoun
A short cassock.
gipsire
A kind of pouch formerly worn at the girdle.
gird
A stroke with a rod or switch; a severe spasm; a twinge; a pang.
girl
A young person of either sex; a child.
gise
To feed or pasture.
girt
Imp. & p. p. of Gird.
gisarm
A weapon with a scythe-shaped blade, and a separate long sharp point, mounted on a long staff and carried by foot soldiers.
gismondite
A native hydrated silicate of alumina, lime, and potash, first noticed near Rome.
gist
A resting place.
glabella
The space between the eyebrows, also including the corresponding part of the frontal bone; the mesophryon.
give
To yield possesion of; to deliver over, as property, in exchange for something; to pay; as, we give the value of what we buy.
gittern
An instrument like a guitar.
giusto
In just, correct, or suitable time.
giving
The act of bestowing as a gift; a conferring or imparting.
gizzard
A thick muscular stomach found in many invertebrate animals.
glair
The white of egg. It is used as a size or a glaze in bookbinding, for pastry, etc.
glacial
Pertaining to ice or to its action; consisting of ice; frozen; icy; esp., pertaining to glaciers; as, glacial phenomena.
glad
Wearing a gay or bright appearance; expressing or exciting joy; producing gladness; exhilarating.
glance
A sudden flash of light or splendor.
glama
A copious gummy secretion of the humor of the eyelids, in consequence of some disorder; blearedness; lippitude.
glare
To shine with a bright, dazzling light.
gnaphalium
A genus of composite plants with white or colored dry and persistent involucres; a kind of everlasting.
gloam
To begin to grow dark; to grow dusky.
glib
Smooth; slippery; as, ice is glib.
glebe
Turf; soil; ground; sod.
glase
To furnish (a window, a house, a sash, a ease, etc.) with glass.
glauberite
A mineral, consisting of the sulphates of soda and lime.
glaver
To prate; to jabber; to babble.
glaze
To become glazed of glassy.
glead
A live coal. See Gleed.
gleg
Quick of perception; alert; sharp.
glede
The common European kite (Milvus ictinus). This name is also sometimes applied to the buzzard.
glee
Music; minstrelsy; entertainment.
glen
A secluded and narrow valley; a dale; a depression between hills.
gley
To squint; to look obliquely; to overlook things.
glim
Brightness; splendor.
gliddery
Giving no sure footing; smooth; slippery.
gilbbery
Slippery; changeable.
glibly
In a glib manner; as, to speak glibly.
gliff
A transient glance; an unexpected view of something that startles one; a sudden fear.
glike
A sneer; a flout.
glires
An order of mammals; the Rodentia.
glint
A glimpse, glance, or gleam.
glioma
A tumor springing from the neuroglia or connective tissue of the brain, spinal cord, or other portions of the nervous system.
glissade
A sliding, as down a snow slope in the Alps.
glitter
To sparkle with light; to shine with a brilliant and broken light or showy luster; to gleam; as, a glittering sword.
glow
To shine with an intense or white heat; to give forth vivid light and heat; to be incandescent.
gloppen
To surprise or astonish; to be startled or astonished.
glome
To gloom; to look gloomy, morose, or sullen.
globated
Having the form of a globe; spherical.
glochidium
The larva or young of the mussel, formerly thought to be a parasite upon the parent's gills.
glonoine
A dilute solution of nitroglycerin used as a neurotic.
gloom
Partial or total darkness; thick shade; obscurity; as, the gloom of a forest, or of midnight.
glottal
Of or pertaining to, or produced by, the glottis; glottic.
glore
To glare; to glower.
gloss
Brightness or luster of a body proceeding from a smooth surface; polish; as, the gloss of silk; cloth is calendered to give it a gloss.
glout
To pout; to look sullen.
glove
To cover with, or as with, a glove.
glunch
Frowning; sulky; sullen.
glucic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, sugar; as, glucic acid.
gloxinia
American genus of herbaceous plants with very handsome bell-shaped blossoms; -- named after B. P. Gloxin, a German botanist.
gloze
To flatter; to wheedle; to fawn; to talk smoothly.
glue
To join with glue or a viscous substance; to cause to stick or hold fast, as if with glue; to fix or fasten.
glum
Moody; silent; sullen.
glynne
A glen. See Glen. [Obs. singly, but occurring often in locative names in Ireland, as Glen does in Scotland.
glut
To swallow, or to swallow greedlly; to gorge.
glycerate
A salt of glyceric acid.
glyph
A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical. See Triglyph.
glyoxalic
Pertaining to, or designating, an aldehyde acid, intermediate between glycol and oxalic acid.
gmelinite
A rhombohedral zeolitic mineral, related in form and composition to chabazite.
godhead
Godship; deity; divinity; divine nature or essence; godhood.
goal
The final purpose or aim; the end to which a design tends, or which a person aims to reach or attain.
gnide
To rub; to bruise; to break in pieces.
gnathic
Of or pertaining to the jaw.
gnar
A knot or gnarl in wood; hence, a tough, thickset man; -- written also gnarr.
gnash
To strike together, as in anger or pain; as, to gnash the teeth.
gnaw
To bite in agony or rage.
gneissic
Relating to, or resembling, gneiss; consisting of gneiss.
gnoscopine
An alkaloid existing in small quantities in opium.
gnof
Churl; curmudgeon.
gnome
An imaginary being, supposed by the Rosicrucians to inhabit the inner parts of the earth, and to be the guardian of mines, quarries, etc.
goad
A pointed instrument used to urge on a beast; hence, any necessity that urges or stimulates.
goaf
That part of a mine from which the mineral has been partially or wholly removed; the waste left in old workings; -- called also gob .
goblet
A kind of cup or drinking vessel having a foot or standard, but without a handle.
gobbet
A mouthful; a lump; a small piece.
goat
A hollow-horned ruminant of the genus Capra, of several species and varieties, esp. the domestic goat (C.
goaves
Old workings. See Goaf.
gobelin
Pertaining to tapestry produced in the so-called Gobelin works, which have been maintained by the French Government since 1667.
gobioid
Like, or pertaining to, the goby, or the genus Gobius.
godchild
One for whom a person becomes sponsor at baptism, and whom he promises to see educated as a Christian; a godson or goddaughter.
goby
One of several species of small marine fishes of the genus Gobius and allied genera.
gocart
A framework moving on casters, designed to support children while learning to walk.
goddess
A female god; a divinity, or deity, of the female sex.
godfather
A man who becomes sponsor for a child at baptism, and makes himself a surety for its Christian training and instruction.
going
The act of moving in any manner; traveling; as, the going is bad.
goeland
A white tropical tern (Cygis candida).
godmother
A woman who becomes sponsor for a child in baptism. See Godfather
godild
A corruption of God yield, i. e., God reward or bless.
godless
Having, or acknowledging, no God; without reverence for God; impious; wicked.
godroon
An ornament produced by notching or carving a rounded molding.
godsend
Something sent by God; an unexpected acquisiton or piece of good fortune.
goety
Invocation of evil spirits; witchcraft.
goemin
A complex mixture of several substances extracted from Irish moss.
goer
One who, or that which, goes; a runner or walker
goff
A game. See Golf.
goggle
To roll the eyes; to stare.
golgotha
Calvary. See the Note under Calvary.
gold
A metallic element, constituting the most precious metal used as a common commercial medium of exchange.
goitred
Affected with goiter.
goolde
An old English name of some yellow flower, -- the marigold (Calendula), according to Dr. Prior, but in Chaucer perhaps the turnsole.
golet
A California trout. See Malma.
golfer
One who plays golf.
goltschut
A small ingot of gold.
goliard
A buffoon in the Middle Ages, who attended rich men's tables to make sport for the guests by ribald stories and songs.
goll
A hand, paw, or claw.
goman
A husband; a master of a family.
golyardeys
A buffoon. See Gollard.
gome
The black grease on the axle of a cart or wagon wheel; -- called also gorm. See Gorm.
grope
To feel with or use the hands; to handle.
granadilla
The fruit of certain species of passion flower (esp. Passiflora quadrangularis) found in Brazil and the West Indies.
gospel
Glad tidings; especially, the good news concerning Christ, the Kingdom of God, and salvation.
gopher
A large land tortoise (Testudo Carilina) of the Southern United States, which makes extensive burrows.
gonidial
Pertaining to, or containing, gonidia.
goneness
A state of exhaustion; faintness, especially as resulting from hunger.
gonakie
An African timber tree (Acacia Adansonii).
gondola
A flat-bottomed boat for freight.
gonfanon
The ensign or standard in use by certain princes or states, such as the mediaeval republics of Italy, and in more recent times by the pope.
gong
A privy or jakes.
good
Possessing moral excellence or virtue; virtuous; pious; religious; -- said of persons or actions.
gonocalyx
The bell of a sessile gonozooid.
gonydial
Pertaining to the gonys of a bird's beak.
guru
A spiritual teacher, guide, or confessor amoung the Hindoos.
goose
Any large web-footen bird of the subfamily Anserinae, and belonging to Anser, Branta, Chen, and several allied genera.
gorhen
The female of the gorcock.
gord
An instrument of gaming; a sort of dice.
goracco
A paste prepared from tobacco, and smoked in hookahs in Western India.
gorce
A pool of water to keep fish in; a wear.
gore
Blood; especially, blood that after effusion has become thick or clotted.
gorge
The throat; the gullet; the canal by which food passes to the stomach.
gory
Covered with gore or clotted blood.
gorm
Axle grease. See Gome.
gorse
Furze. See Furze.
goshawk
Any large hawk of the genus Astur, of which many species and varieties are known. The European (Astur palumbarius) and the American (A.
goslet
One of several species of pygmy geese, of the genus Nettepus. They are about the size of a teal, and inhabit Africa, India, and Australia.
gowan
The daisy, or mountain daisy.
gouge
A chisel, with a hollow or semicylindrical blade, for scooping or cutting holes, channels, or grooves, in wood, stone, etc.
goth
One who is rude or uncivilized; a barbarian; a rude, ignorant person.
gossamer
A fine, filmy substance, like cobwebs, floating in the air, in calm, clear weather, especially in autumn.
gote
A channel for water.
goethite
A hydrous oxide of iron, occurring in prismatic crystals, also massive, with a fibrous, reniform, or stalactitic structure.
gouache
A method of painting with opaque colors, which have been ground in water and mingled with a preparation of gum; also, a picture thus painted.
gour
A fire worshiper; a Gheber or Gueber.
gouger
See Plum Gouger.
goujere
The venereal disease.
gout
A drop; a clot or coagulation.
gove
A mow; a rick for hay.
grace
The exercise of love, kindness, mercy, favor; disposition to benefit or serve another; favor bestowed or privilege conferred.
gown
A loose, flowing upper garment
gowdnook
The saury pike; -- called also gofnick.
gowk
To make a, booby of one); to stupefy.
graafian
Pertaining to, or discovered by, Regnier de Graaf, a Dutch physician.
grab
A vessel used on the Malabar coast, having two or three masts.
grahamite
One who follows the dietetic system of Graham.
gradate
To grade or arrange (parts in a whole, colors in painting, etc.), so that they shall harmonize.
graf
A German title of nobility, equivalent to earl in English, or count in French. See Earl.
grallatory
Of or pertaining to the Grallatores, or waders.
grail
A book of offices in the Roman Catholic Church; a gradual.
gram
The East Indian name of the chick-pea (Cicer arietinum) and its seeds; also, other similar seeds there used for food.
grice
See Gree, a step.
graze
To feed or supply (cattle, sheep, etc.) with grass; to furnish pasture for.
glatified
Pleased; indulged according to desire.
graaper
One who grasps or seizes; one who catches or holds.
grape
The plant which bears this fruit; the grapevine.
grasp
To seize and hold by clasping or embracing with the fingers or arms; to catch to take possession of.
grasping
Seizing; embracing; catching.
grate
Serving to gratify; agreeable.
gray
Gray-haired; gray-headed; of a gray color; hoary.
gratifier
One who gratifies or pleases.
gravamen
The grievance complained of; the substantial cause of the action; also, in general, the ground or essence of a complaint.
gtraystone
A grayish or greenish compact rock, composed of feldspar and augite, and allied to basalt.
graywacke
A conglomerate or grit rock, consisting of rounded pebbles sand firmly united together.
greillade
Iron ore in coarse powder, prepared for reduction by the Catalan process.
gree
Good will; favor; pleasure; satisfaction; -- used esp. in such phrases as: to take in gree; to accept in gree; that is, to take favorably.
grease
Animal fat, as tallow or lard, especially when in a soft state; oily or unctuous matter of any kind.
grecian
Of or pertaining to Greece; Greek.
greffier
A registrar or recorder; a notary.
gregal
Pertaining to, or like, a flock.
gretto
Imp. of Greet, to salute.
gremial
Of or pertaining to the lap or bosom.
grenade
A hollow ball or shell of iron filled with powder of other explosive, ignited by means of a fuse, and thrown from the hand among enemies.
gruesome
Ugly; frightful.
grey
See Gray (the correct orthography).
grip
A small ditch or furrow.
grieve
To occasion grief to; to wound the sensibilities of; to make sorrowful; to cause to suffer; to afflict; to hurt; to try.
gridelin
A color mixed of white, and red, or a gray violet.
grid
A grating of thin parallel bars, similar to a gridiron.
grade
A harsh scraping or cutting; a grating.
grief
Cause of sorrow or pain; that which afficts or distresses; trial; grievance.
greeve
A manager of a farm, or overseer of any work; a reeve; a manorial bailiff.
gril
Harsh; hard; severe; stern; rough.
griff
An arrangement of parallel bars for lifting the hooked wires which raise the warp threads in a loom for weaving figured goods.
grig
A cricket or grasshopper.
grim
Of forbidding or fear-inspiring aspect; fierce; stern; surly; cruel; frightful; horrible.
grin
To show the teeth, as a dog; to snarl.
groan
To give forth a low, moaning sound in breathing; to utter a groan, as in pain, in sorrow, or in derision; to moan.
gris
A costly kind of fur.
griman
The man who manipulates a grip.
grippe
The influenza or epidemic catarrh.
grit
Sand or gravel; rough, hard particles.
grizzle
Gray; a gray color; a mixture of white and black.
groin
The snout of a swine.
grocer
A trader who deals in tea, sugar, spices, coffee, fruits, and various other commodities.
grog
A mixture of spirit and water not sweetened; hence, any intoxicating liquor.
grond
Obs. imp. of Grind.
grommet
A ring formed by twisting on itself a single strand of an unlaid rope; also, a metallic eyelet in or for a sail or a mailbag.
groom
A boy or young man; a waiter; a servant; especially, a man or boy who has charge of horses, or the stable.
gunlock
The lock of a gun, for producing the discharge. See Lock.
guenon
One of several long-tailed Oriental monkeys, of the genus Cercocebus, as the green monkey and grivet.
grundel
A groundling (fish).
grub
To dig in or under the ground, generally for an object that is difficult to reach or extricate; to be occupied in digging.
ground
The surface of the earth; the outer crust of the globe, or some indefinite portion of it.
gros
A heavy silk with a dull finish; as, gros de Naples; gros de Tours.
grotesque
A whimsical figure, or scene, such as is found in old crypts and grottoes.
grove
A smaller group of trees than a forest, and without underwood, planted, or growing naturally as if arranged by art; a wood of small extent.
grow
To increase in any way; to become larger and stronger; to be augmented; to advance; to extend; to wax; to accrue.
gruel
A light, liquid food, made by boiling meal of maize, oatmeal, or fiour in water or milk; thin porridge.
grucche
To murmur; to grumble.
grudge
To hold or harbor with malicioua disposition or purpose; to cherish enviously.
gruf
Forwards; with one's face to the ground.
grum
Morose; severe of countenance; sour; surly; glum; grim.
guaiac
Pertaining to, or resembling, guaiacum.
grype
A vulture; the griffin.
gryde
To gride. See Gride.
gryllus
A genus of insects including the common crickets.
grysbok
A small South African antelope (Neotragus melanotis).  It is speckled with gray and chestnut, above; the under parts are reddish fawn.
guacharo
A nocturnal bird of South America and Trinidad (Steatornis Caripensis, or S. steatornis); -- called also oilbird.
guava
A tropical tree, or its fruit, of the genus Psidium. Two varieties are well known, the P. pyriferum, or white guava, and P.
guan
Any one of many species of large gallinaceous birds of Central and South America, belonging to Penelope, Pipile, Ortalis, and allied genera.
guara
The scarlet ibis. See Ibis.
gudgeon
A small European freshwater fish (Gobio fluviatilis), allied to the carp. It is easily caught and often used for food and for bait.
guelfic
Of or pertaining to the family or the faction of the Guelphs.
gule
To give the color of gules to.
guinea
A gold coin of England current for twenty-one shillings sterling, or about five dollars, but not coined since the issue of sovereigns in 1817.
guffaw
A loud burst of laughter; a horse laugh.
guerdon
A reward; requital; recompense;  -- used in both a good and a bad sense.
guess
To form an opinion concerning, without knowledge or means of knowledge; to judge of at random; to conjecture.
guidable
Capable of being guided; willing to be guided or counseled.
guild
A religious association or society, organized for charitable purposes or for assistance in parish work.
gula
The upper front of the neck, next to the chin; the upper throat.
guise
External appearance in manner or dress; appropriate indication or expression; garb; shape.
guitguit
One of several species of small tropical American birds of the family Coerebidae, allied to the creepers; -- called also quit.
gulch
Act of gulching or gulping.
guid
A flower. See Gold.
gult
Guilt. See Guilt.
gull
To deceive; to cheat; to mislead; to trick; to defraud.
gulf
A hollow place in the earth; an abyss; a deep chasm or basin,
gulgul
A cement made in India from sea shells, pulverized and mixed with oil, and spread over a ship's bottom, to prevent the boring of worms.
gulosity
Excessive appetite; greediness; voracity.
gulp
To swallow eagerly, or in large draughts; to swallow up; to take down at one swallow.
gumma
A kind of soft tumor, usually of syphilitic origin.
guly
Of or pertaining to gules; red.
gumbo
A soup thickened with the mucilaginous pods of the okra; okra soup.
gunboat
A vessel of light draught, carrying one or more guns.
gump
A dolt; a dunce.
gunflint
A sharpened flint for the lock of a gun, to ignite the charge. It was in common use before the introduction of percussion caps.
gynobase
A dilated base or receptacle, supporting a multilocular ovary.
gusset
A small piece of cloth inserted in a garment, for the purpose of strengthening some part or giving it a tapering enlargement.
gurl
A young person of either sex. [Obs.] See Girl.
gunreach
The reach or distance to which a gun will shoot; gunshot.
gunnage
The number of guns carried by a ship of war.
gunpowder
A black, granular, explosive substance, consisting of an intimate mechanical mixture of niter, charcoal, and sulphur.
gunshot
Act of firing a gun; a shot.
gurgle
To run or flow in a broken, irregular, noisy current, as water from a bottle, or a small stream among pebbles or stones.
gurry
An alvine evacuation; also, refuse matter.
gurmy
A level; a working.
gurnet
One ofseveral European marine fishes, of the genus Trigla and allied genera, having a large and spiny head, with mailed cheeks.
gurt
A gutter or channel for water, hewn out of the bottom of a working drift.
gush
To issue with violence and rapidity, as a fluid; to rush forth as a fluid from confinement; to flow copiously.
gwiniad
A fish (Coregonus ferus) of North Wales and Northern Europe, allied to the lake whitefish; -- called also powan, and schelly.
gutwort
A plant, Globularia Alypum, a violent purgative, found in Africa.
gust
A sudden squall; a violent blast of wind; a sudden and brief rushing or driving of the wind. Snow, and hail, stormy gust and flaw.
guttate
Spotted, as if discolored by drops.
guze
A roundlet of tincture sanguine, which is blazoned without mention of the tincture.
guzzle
To swallow liquor greedily; to drink much or frequently.
gynaecium
The part of a large house, among the ancients, exclusively appropriated to women.
gyle
Fermented wort used for making vinegar.
gymnasium
A place or building where athletic exercises are performed; a school for gymnastics.
gynecian
Of or relating to women.
gynno
To begin. See Gin.
haberdash
To deal in small wares.
gyrus
A convoluted ridge between grooves; a convolution; as, the gyri of the brain; the gyri of brain coral.
gyre
A circular motion, or a circle described by a moving body; a turn or revolution; a circuit.
gypseous
Resembling or containing gypsum; partaking of the qualities of gypsum.
gyral
Moving in a circular path or way; whirling; gyratory.
gyrfalcon
One of several species and varieties of large Arctic falcons, esp. Falco rusticolus and the white species F.
gyrodus
A genus of extinct oolitic fishes, having rounded teeth in several rows adapted for crushing.
haaf
The deepsea fishing for cod, ling, and tusk, off the Shetland Isles.
gyte
Delirious; senselessly extravagant; as, the man is clean gyte.
gyve
A shackle; especially, one to confine the legs; a fetter.
haak
A sea fish. See Hake.
haar
A fog; esp., a fog or mist with a chill wind.
hadj
The pilgrimage to Mecca, performed by Mohammedans.
hack
A frame or grating of various kinds; as, a frame for drying bricks, fish, or cheese; a rack for feeding cattle; a grating in a mill race, etc.
habilatory
Of or pertaining to clothing; wearing clothes.
hachure
A short line used in drawing and engraving, especially in shading and denoting different surfaces, as in map drawing.
haddock
A marine food fish (Melanogrammus aeglefinus), allied to the cod, inhabiting the northern coasts of Europe and America.
hade
The descent of a hill.
haffle
To stammer; to speak unintelligibly; to prevaricate.
haecceity
Literally, this-ness. A scholastic term to express individuality or singleness; as, this book.
haemad
Toward the haemal side; on the haemal side of; -- opposed to neurad.
hagberry
A plant of the genus Prunus (P. Padus); the bird cherry.
haft
To set in, or furnish with, a haft; as, to haft a dagger.
hagdon
One of several species of sea birds of the genus Puffinus; esp., P. major, the greater shearwarter, and P.
hetman
A Cossack headman or general. The title of chief hetman is now held by the heir to the throne of Russia.
hawk
To catch, or attempt to catch, birds by means of hawks trained for the purpose, and let loose on the prey; to practice falconry.
happed
Wrapped; covered; cloaked.
halvans
Impure ore; dirty ore.
halcyon
Hence: Calm; quiet; peaceful; undisturbed; happy.
hair
Hair (human or animal) used for various purposes; as, hair for stuffing cushions.
haiduck
Formerly, a mercenary foot soldier in Hungary, now, a halberdier of a Hungarian noble, or an attendant in German or Hungarian courts.
hagiarchy
A sacred government; by holy orders of men.
hagseed
The offspring of a hag.
haik
A large piece of woolen or cotton cloth worn by Arabs as an outer garment.
hail
Small roundish masses of ice precipitated from the clouds, where they are formed by the congelation of vapor.
hakim
A wise man; a physician, esp. a Mohammedan.
haye
The Egyptian asp or cobra (Naja haje.) It is related to the cobra of India, and like the latter has the power of inflating its neck into a hood.
hake
A drying shed, as for unburned tile.
halacha
The general term for the Hebrew oral or traditional law; one of two branches of exposition in the Midrash.
halberd
An ancient long-handled weapon, of which the head had a point and several long, sharp edges, curved or straight, and sometimes additional points.
halk
A nook; a corner.
halidom
Holiness; sanctity; sacred oath; sacred things; sanctuary; -- used chiefly in oaths.
hale
Sound; entire; healthy; robust; not impaired; as, a hale body.
half
Consisting of a moiety, or half; as, a half bushel; a half hour; a half dollar; a half view.
halmas
The feast of All Saints; Hallowmas.
haliotis
A genus of marine shells; the ear-shells. See Abalone.
halo
An ideal glory investing, or affecting one's perception of, an object.
hall
A building or room of considerable size and stateliness, used for public purposes; as, Westminster Hall, in London.
halma
The long jump, with weights in the hands, -- the most important of the exercises of the Pentathlon.
hals
The neck or throat.
halt
3d pers. sing. pres. of Hold, contraction for holdeth.
hamular
Hooked; hooklike; hamate; as, the hamular process of the sphenoid bone.
haitic
Pertaining to Ham or his descendants.
hamburg
A commercial city of Germany, near the mouth of the Elbe.
halysites
A genus of Silurian fossil corals; the chain corals. See Chain coral, under Chain.
hamadryad
A tree nymph whose life ended with that of the particular tree, usually an oak, which had been her abode.
hame
One of the two curved pieces of wood or metal, in the harness of a draught horse, to which the traces are fastened.
haminura
A large edible river fish (Erythrinus macrodon) of Guiana.
hamous
Having the end hooked or curved.
hamlet
A small village; a little cluster of houses in the country.
hammer
An instrument for driving nails, beating metals, and the like, consisting of a head, usually of steel or iron, fixed crosswise to a handle.
hamper
To put in a hamper.
hamshackle
To fasten (an animal) by a rope binding the head to one of the fore legs; as, to hamshackle a horse or cow; hence, to bind or restrain; to curb.
hang
To fasten in a manner which will allow of free motion upon the point or points of suspension; -- said of a pendulum, a swing, a door, gate, etc.
hand
That part of the fore limb below the forearm or wrist in man and monkeys, and the corresponding part in many other animals; manus; paw.
hanap
A rich goblet, esp. one used on state occasions.
hance
To raise; to elevate.
hadsome
To render handsome.
handsomely
In a handsome manner.
hansard
An official report of proceedings in the British Parliament; -- so called from the name of the publishers.
hank
A parcel consisting of two or more skeins of yarn or thread tied together.
hanoverian
Of or pertaining to Hanover or its people, or to the House of Hanover in England.
haphazard
Extra hazard; chance; accident; random.
hapless
Without hap or luck; luckless; unfortunate; unlucky; unhappy; as, hapless youth; hapless maid.
hast
2d pers. sing. pres. of. Have, contr. of havest.
harquebuse
A firearm with match holder, trigger, and tumbler, made in the second half of the 15th century. the barrel was about forty inches long.
haricot
A ragout or stew of meat with beans and other vegetables.
harbinger
A forerunner; a precursor; a messenger.
hapuku
A large and valuable food fish (Polyprion prognathus) of New Zealand. It sometimes weighs one hundred pounds or more.
harangue
To make an harangue; to declaim.
hard
Difficult, mentally or judicially; not easily apprehended, decided, or resolved; as a hard problem.
hare
To excite; to tease, or worry; to harry.
harm
Injury; hurt; damage; detriment; misfortune.
hark
To listen; to hearken.
harl
A filamentous substance; especially, the filaments of flax or hemp.
harness
Originally, the complete dress, especially in a military sense, of a man or a horse; hence, in general, armor.
harp
A musical instrument consisting of a triangular frame furnished with strings and sometimes with pedals, held upright, and played with the fingers.
hary
To draw; to drag; to carry off by violence.
hart
A stag; the male of the red deer. See the Note under Buck.
harrage
To harass; to plunder from.
harsh
Rough; disagreeable; grating
haruspice
A diviner of ancient Rome. Same as Aruspice.
harvest
The gathering of a crop of any kind; the ingathering of the crops; also, the season of gathering grain and fruits, late summer or early autumn.
haslet
The edible viscera, as the heart, liver, etc., of a beast, esp. of a hog.
hash
That which is hashed or chopped up; meat and vegetables, especially such as have been already cooked, chopped into small pieces and mixed.
hask
A basket made of rushes or flags, as for carrying fish.
hasp
A spindle to wind yarn, thread, or silk on.
hassock
A rank tuft of bog grass; a tussock.
haunch
The hip; the projecting region of the lateral parts of the pelvis and the hip joint; the hind part.
hatstand
A stand of wood or iron, with hooks or pegs upon which to hang hats, etc.
hatch
To cross with lines in a peculiar manner in drawing and engraving. See Hatching.
hatable
Capable of being, or deserving to be, hated; odious; detestable.
hatband
A band round the crown of a hat; sometimes, a band of black cloth, crape, etc., worn as a badge of mourning.
hate
To love less, relatively.
hatrack
A hatstand; hattree.
haugh
A low-lying meadow by the side of a river.
hatte
Pres. & imp. sing. & pl. of Hote, to be called. See Hote.
hauerite
Native sulphide of manganese a reddish brown or brownish black mineral.
haul
To pull or draw with force; to drag.
haum
See Haulm, stalk.
have
To hold in possession or control; to own; as, he has a farm.
hautboy
A wind instrument, sounded through a reed, and similar in shape to the clarinet, but with a thinner tone.
haurient
In pale, with the head in chief; -- said of the figure of a fish, as if rising for air.
hausen
A large sturgeon (Acipenser huso) from the region of the Black Sea. It is sometimes twelve feet long.
hauynite
A blue isometric mineral, characteristic of some volcani/ rocks. It is a silicate of alumina, lime, and soda, with sulphate of lime.
havana
Of or pertaining to Havana, the capital of the island of Cuba; as, an Havana cigar
hawaiian
Belonging to Hawaii or the Sandwich Islands, or to the people of Hawaii.
havildar
In the British Indian armies, a noncommissioned officer of native soldiers, corresponding to a sergeant.
havoc
Wide and general destruction; devastation; waste.
hawfinch
The common European grosbeak (Coccothraustes vulgaris); -- called also cherry finch, and coble.
hawebake
Probably, the baked berry of the hawthorn tree, that is, coarse fare. See 1st Haw, 2.
hawhaw
To laugh boisterously.
helot
A slave in ancient Sparta; a Spartan serf; hence, a slave or serf.
hebdomad
A week; a period of seven days.
hazard
A game of chance played with dice.
hayfield
A field where grass for hay has been cut; a meadow.
hawthorn
A thorny shrub or tree (the Crataegus oxyacantha), having deeply lobed, shining leaves, small, roselike, fragrant flowers, and a fruit called haw.
hawm
See Haulm, straw.
hawse
The situation of the cables when a vessel is moored with two anchors, one on the starboard, the other on the port bow.
haybird
The European spotted flycatcher.
haycock
A conical pile or hear of hay in the field.
hayrack
A frame mounted on the running gear of a wagon, and used in hauling hay, straw, sheaves, etc.; -- called also hay rigging.
hayloft
A loft or scaffold for hay.
haymaker
One who cuts and cures hay.
haystack
A stack or conical pile of hay in the open air.
haytian
Of pertaining to Hayti.
heal
To cover, as a roof, with tiles, slate, lead, or the like.
hazle
To make dry; to dry.
haze
To be hazy, or tick with haze.
hazily
In a hazy manner; mistily; obscurely; confusedly.
hazy
Thick with haze; somewhat obscured with haze; not clear or transparent.
head
The place where the head should go; as, the head of a bed, of a grave, etc.; the head of a carriage, that is, the hood which covers the head.
hear
To perceive by the ear; to apprehend or take cognizance of by the ear; as, to hear sounds; to hear a voice; to hear one call.
heam
The afterbirth or secundines of a beast.
heap
A crowd; a throng; a multitude or great number of persons.
heat
A single complete operation of heating, as at a forge or in a furnace; as, to make a horseshoe in a certain number of heats.
heave
To cause to move upward or onward by a lifting effort; to lift; to raise; to hoist; -- often with up; as, the wave heaved the boat on land.
heep
The hip of the dog-rose.
heddle
To draw (the warp thread) through the heddle-eyes, in weaving.
hecatomb
A sacrifice of a hundred oxen or cattle at the same time; hence, the sacrifice or slaughter of any large number of victims.
hebe
The goddess of youth, daughter of Jupiter and Juno. She was believed to have the power of restoring youth and beauty to those who had lost them.
hebraic
Of or pertaining to the Hebrews, or to the language of the Hebrews.
heck
The bolt or latch of a door.
hectare
A measure of area, or superficies, containing a hundred ares, or 10,000 square meters, and equivalent to 2.
hedonic
Pertaining to pleasure.
hederal
Of or pertaining to ivy.
hedge
To inclose or separate with a hedge; to fence with a thickly set line or thicket of shrubs or small trees; as, to hedge a field or garden.
heed
To mind; to regard with care; to take notice of; to attend to; to observe.
heel
To lean or tip to one side, as a ship; as, the ship heels aport; the boat heeled over when the squall struck it.
heir
One who receives any endowment from an ancestor or relation; as, the heir of one's reputation or virtues.
hegelian
Pertaining to Hegelianism.
heer
A yarn measure of six hundred yards or / of a spindle. See Spindle.
heft
The act or effort of heaving/ violent strain or exertion.
height
The condition of being high; elevated position.
heinous
Hateful; hatefully bad; flagrant; odious; atrocious; giving great great offense; -- applied to deeds or to character.
hele
Health; welfare.
helamys
See Jumping hare, under Hare.
held
Imp. & p. p. of Hold.
hell
The place of the dead, or of souls after death; the grave; -- called in Hebrew sheol, and by the Greeks hades.
heliacal
Emerging from the light of the sun, or passing into it; rising or setting at the same, or nearly the same, time as the sun.
helm
See Haulm, straw.
heppen
Neat; fit; comfortable.
henbane
A plant of the genus Hyoscyamus (H. niger). All parts of the plant are poisonous, and the leaves are used for the same purposes as belladonna.
hemlock
An evergreen tree common in North America (Abies, / Tsuga, Canadensis); hemlock spruce.
hemachate
A species of agate, sprinkled with spots of red jasper.
help
To furnish with the means of deliverance from trouble; as, to help one in distress; to help one out of prison.
helve
The handle of an ax, hatchet, or adze.
hemelytrum
One of the partially thickened anterior wings of certain insects, as of many Hemiptera, the earwigs, etc.
hemicardia
A lateral half of the heart, either the right or left.
hemp
A plant of the genus Cannabis (C. sativa), the fibrous skin or bark of which is used for making cloth and cordage.
hemmel
A shed or hovel for cattle.
hemophilia
See Hematophilia.
hemselven
Themselves; -- used reflexively.
hemuse
The roebuck in its third year.
henotheism
Primitive religion in which each of several divinities is regarded as independent, and is worshiped without reference to the rest.
henfish
A marine fish; the sea bream.
hence
From this place; away.
hende
Skillful; dexterous; clever.
henhouse
A house or shelter for fowls.
henna
A thorny tree or shrub of the genus Lawsonia (L. alba). The fragrant white blossoms are used by the Buddhists in religious ceremonies.
hent
To seize; to lay hold on; to catch; to get.
henpeck
To subject to petty authority; -- said of a wife who thus treats her husband. Commonly used in the past participle (often adjectively).
henroost
A place where hens roost.
henware
A coarse, blackish seaweed. See Badderlocks.
hepar
Any substance resembling hepar proper, in appearance; specifically, in homeopathy, calcium sulphide, called also hepar sulphuris calcareum (/).
herpetic
Pertaining to, or resembling, the herpes; partaking of the nature of herpes; as, herpetic eruptions.
here
Her; hers. See Her.
herb
A plant whose stem does not become woody and permanent, but dies, at least down to the ground, after flowering.
hepta
A combining form from Gr. "epta`, seven.
herakline
A picrate compound, used as an explosive in blasting.
herculean
Requiring the strength of Hercules; hence, very great, difficult, or dangerous; as, an Herculean task.
herd
A crowd of low people; a rabble.
hermetical
Of, pertaining to, or taught by, Hermes Trismegistus; as, hermetic philosophy. Hence: Alchemical; chemic.
herie
To praise; to worship.
hirling
The young of the sea trout.
hern
A heron; esp., the common European heron.
hero
An illustrious man, supposed to be exalted, after death, to a place among the gods; a demigod, as Hercules.
hesp
A measure of two hanks of linen thread.
hertely
Hearty; heartily.
herr
A title of respect given to gentlemen in Germany, equivalent to the English Mister.
hers
See the Note under Her, pron.
hery
To worship; to glorify; to praise.
hesitancy
The act of hesitating, or pausing to consider; slowness in deciding; vacillation; also, the manner of one who hesitates.
hesychast
One of a mystical sect of the Greek Church in the fourteenth century; a quietist.
hessian
Of or relating to Hesse, in Germany, or to the Hessians.
hest
Command; precept; injunction.
hete
Variant of Hote.
hetarism
A supposed primitive state of society, in which all the women of a tribe were held in common.
hething
Contempt; scorn.
home
One's native land; the place or country in which one dwells; the place where one's ancestors dwell or dwelt.
hiss
To make a similar noise by any means; to pass with a sibilant sound; as, the arrow hissed as it flew.
higgle
To hawk or peddle provisions.
heyday
An expression of frolic and exultation, and sometimes of wonder.
hewn
Felled, cut, or shaped as with an ax; roughly squared; as, a house built of hewn logs.
heuristic
Serving to discover or find out.
heugh
A crag; a cliff; a glen with overhanging sides.
heuk
Variant of Huke.
hewe
A domestic servant; a retainer.
hewhole
The European green woodpecker. See Yaffle.
hexicology
The science which treats of the complex relations of living creatures to other organisms, and to their surrounding conditions generally.
hexa
A prefix or combining form, used to denote six, sixth, etc.; as, hexatomic, hexabasic.
hexdecyl
The essential radical, C16H33, of hecdecane.
hexoic
Pertaining to, or derived from, hexane; as, hexoic acid.
hexyl
A compound radical, C6H13, regarded as the essential residue of hexane, and a related series of compounds.
hidage
A tax formerly paid to the kings of England for every hide of land.
hibernacle
That which serves for protection or shelter in winter; winter quarters; as, the hibernacle of an animal or a plant.
heyne
A wretch; a rascal.
hiatus
The concurrence of two vowels in two successive words or syllables.
hiccough
To have a hiccough or hiccoughs.
hickway
The lesser spotted woodpecker (Dendrocopus minor) of Europe.
hiding
The act of hiding or concealing, or of withholding from view or knowledge; concealment.
hidden
From Hide. Concealed; put out of view; secret; not known; mysterious.
hide
To conceal, or withdraw from sight; to put out of view; to secrete.
hierapicra
A warming cathartic medicine, made of aloes and canella bark.
hifalutin
See Highfaluting.
hine
A servant; a farm laborer; a peasant; a hind.
hilt
A handle; especially, the handle of a sword, dagger, or the like.
hilding
A base, menial wretch.
high
Elevated in character or quality, whether moral or intellectual; preeminent; honorable; as, high aims, or motives.
hilal
Of or pertaining to a hilum.
hile
To hide. See Hele.
hill
A natural elevation of land, or a mass of earth rising above the common level of the surrounding land; an eminence less than a mountain.
himselven
Themselves. See Hemself.
hilum
The eye of a bean or other seed; the mark or scar at the point of attachment of an ovule or seed to its base or support; -- called also hile.
himalayan
Of or pertaining to the Himalayas, the great mountain chain in Hindostan.
himyaritic
Pertaining to Himyar, an ancient king of Yemen, in Arabia, or to his successors or people; as, the Himjaritic characters, language, etc.
hind
The female of the red deer, of which the male is the stag.
hipshot
Having the hip dislocated; hence, having one hip lower than the other.
hint
To bring to mind by a slight mention or remote allusion; to suggest in an indirect manner; as, to hint a suspicion.
hinge
One of the four cardinal points, east, west, north, or south.
hinny
To neigh; to whinny.
hiphalt
Lame in the hip.
hippe
A genus of marine decapod crustaceans, which burrow rapidly in the sand by pushing themselves backward; -- called also bait bug.
hirs
Hers; theirs. See Here, pron.
hircin
Hircic acid. See Hircic.
hire
A bailment by which the use of a thing, or the services and labor of a person, are contracted for at a certain price or reward.
hirudine
Of or pertaining to the leeches.
hirtellous
Pubescent with minute and somewhat rigid hairs.
hispanic
Of or pertaining to Spain or its language; as, Hispanic words.
hogfish
A large West Indian and Florida food fish (Lachnolaemus).
hoboy
A hautboy or oboe.
hoar
White, or grayish white; as, hoar frost; hoar cliffs.
hithe
A port or small haven; -- used in composition; as, Lambhithe, now Lambeth.
hist
Hush; be silent; -- a signal for silence.
hitch
To become entangled or caught; to be linked or yoked; to unite; to cling.
hitter
One who hits or strikes; as, a hard hitter.
hive
A box, basket, or other structure, for the reception and habitation of a swarm of honeybees.
hobgoblin
A frightful goblin; an imp; a bugaboo; also, a name formerly given to the household spirit, Robin Goodfellow.
hoax
A deception for mockery or mischief; a deceptive trick or story; a practical joke.
hobbist
One who accepts the doctrines of Thomas Hobbes.
hobiler
A light horseman. See 2d Hobbler.
hobnail
A short, sharp-pointed, large-headed nail, -- used in shoeing houses and for studding the soles of heavy shoes.
hodiernal
Of this day; belonging to the present day.
hocus
To deceive or cheat.
hocco
The crested curassow; -- called also royal pheasant. See Curassow.
hock
To disable by cutting the tendons of the hock; to hamstring; to hough.
hoddengray
Applied to coarse cloth made of undyed wool, formerly worn by Scotch peasants.
hodgepodge
A mixed mass; a medley. See Hotchpot.
hoemother
The basking or liver shark; -- called also homer. See Liver shark, under Liver.
hodman
A man who carries a hod; a mason's tender.
hoecake
A cake of Indian meal, water, and salt, baked before the fire or in the ashes; -- so called because often cooked on a hoe.
hogback
An upward curve or very obtuse angle in the upper surface of any member, as of a timber laid horizontally; -- the opposite of camber.
hogchain
A chain or tie rod, in a boat or barge, to prevent the vessel from hogging.
hoker
Scorn; derision; abusive talk.
hogreeve
A civil officer charged with the duty of impounding hogs running at large.
hognut
In England, the Bunium flexuosum, a tuberous plant.
hogged
Broken or strained so as to have an upward curve between the ends. See Hog, v. i.
hogh
A hill; a cliff.
hogo
High flavor; strong scent.
hogpen
A pen or sty for hogs.
hoiden
A rude, clownish youth.
hogscore
A distance lime brawn across the rink or course between the middle line and the tee.
hogweed
A common weed (Ambrosia artemisiaege). See Ambrosia, 3.
hoist
To raise; to lift; to elevate; esp., to raise or lift to a desired elevation, by means of tackle, as a sail, a flag, a heavy package or weight.
hoit
To leap; to caper; to romp noisily.
holm
A common evergreen oak, of Europe (Quercus Ilex); -- called also ilex, and holly.
hole
A hollow place or cavity; an excavation; a pit; an opening in or through a solid body, a fabric, etc.
holcad
A large ship of burden, in ancient Greece.
hold
The whole interior portion of a vessel below the lower deck, in which the cargo is stowed.
holiday
A consecrated day; religious anniversary; a day set apart in honor of some person, or in commemoration of some event.
holla
See Hollo, v. i.
holster
A leather case for a pistol, carried by a horseman at the bow of his saddle.
holoblast
An ovum composed entirely of germinal matter. See Meroblast.
holpen
Imp. & p. p. of Help.
holy
Set apart to the service or worship of God; hallowed; sacred; reserved from profane or common use; holy vessels; a holy priesthood.
holt
3d pers. sing. pres. of Hold, contr. from holdeth.
homacanth
Having the dorsal fin spines symmetrical, and in the same line; -- said of certain fishes.
houlet
An owl. See Howlet.
horal
Of or pertaining to an hour, or to hours.
hoonoomaun
An Indian monkey. See Entellus.
honk
The cry of a wild goose.
homocercal
Having the tail nearly or quite symmetrical, the vertebral column terminating near its base; -- opposed to heterocercal.
homicidal
Pertaining to homicide; tending to homicide; murderous.
hommock
A small eminence of a conical form, of land or of ice; a knoll; a hillock. See Hummock.
homunculus
A little man; a dwarf; a manikin.
hone
To pine; to lament; to long.
hoof
The horny substance or case that covers or terminates the feet of certain animals, as horses, oxen, etc.
honor
Esteem due or paid to worth; high estimation; respect; consideration; reverence; veneration; manifestation of respect or reverence.
hood
State; condition.
hook
That part of a hinge which is fixed to a post, and on which a door or gate hangs and turns.
hoolock
A small black gibbon (Hylobates hoolock), found in the mountains of Assam.
hopbind
The climbing stem of the hop.
hoot
To cry out or shout in contempt.
hoop
A pliant strip of wood or metal bent in a circular form, and united at the ends, for holding together the staves of casks, tubs, etc.
hoosier
A nickname given to an inhabitant of the State of Indiana.
hoove
A disease in cattle consisting in inflammation of the stomach by gas, ordinarily caused by eating too much green food; tympany; bloating.
hoven
Affected with hoove; as, hooven, or hoven, cattle.
hoplite
A heavy-armed infantry soldier.
hope
A sloping plain between mountain ridges.
hopingly
In a hopeful manner.
hopped
Impregnated with hops.
hopyard
A field where hops are raised.
hospitable
Receiving and entertaining strangers or guests with kindness and without reward; kind to strangers and guests; characterized by hospitality.
horrendous
Fearful; frightful.
horizon
The circle which bounds that part of the earth's surface visible to a spectator from a given point; the apparent junction of the earth and sky.
horde
A wandering troop or gang; especially, a clan or tribe of a nomadic people migrating from place to place for the sake of pasturage, plunder, etc.
horehound
A plant of the genus Marrubium (M. vulgare), which has a bitter taste, and is a weak tonic, used as a household remedy for colds, coughing, etc.
horn
A hard, projecting, and usually pointed organ, growing upon the heads of certain animals, esp. of the ruminants, as cattle, goats, and the like.
horography
An account of the hours.
hosanna
A Hebrew exclamation of praise to the Lord, or an invocation of blessings.
horse
The male of the genus horse, in distinction from the female or male; usually, a castrated male.
hortation
The act of exhorting, inciting, or giving advice; exhortation.
hose
Close-fitting trousers or breeches, as formerly worn, reaching to the knee.
hosier
One who deals in hose or stocking, or in goods knit or woven like hose.
hothouse
A bagnio, or bathing house.
hotchpotch
A mingled mass; a confused mixture; a stew of various ingredients; a hodgepodge.
host
The consecrated wafer, believed to be the body of Christ, which in the Mass is offered as a sacrifice; also, the bread before consecration.
hotbed
A place which favors rapid growth or development; as, a hotbed of sedition.
hote
To command; to enjoin.
hotfoot
In haste; foothot.
hotpress
To apply to, in conjunction with mechanical pressure, for the purpose of giving a smooth and glosay surface, or to express oil, etc.
hotly
In a hot or fiery manner; ardently; vehemently; violently; hastily; as, a hotly pursued.
hotness
The quality or state of being hot.
hottentot
One of a degraded and savage race of South Africa, with yellowish brown complexion, high cheek bones, and wooly hair growing in tufts.
hotspur
A rash, hot-headed man.
hough
To cut with a hoe.
hued
Having color; -- usually in composition; as, bright-hued; many-hued.
howl
To utter a loud, protraced, mournful sound or cry, as dogs and wolves often do.
hove
Imp. & p. p. of Heave.
housage
A fee for keeping goods in a house.
hound
A despicable person.
hour
The twenty-fourth part of a day; sixty minutes.
houtou
A beautiful South American motmot.
houve
A head covering of various kinds; a hood; a coif; a cap.
howdah
A seat or pavilion, generally covered, fastened on the back of an elephant, for the rider or riders.
howadji
A merchant; -- so called in the East because merchants were formerly the chief travelers.
howbeit
Be it as it may; nevertheless; notwithstanding; although; albeit; yet; but; however.
howel
A tool used by coopers for smoothing and chamfering rheir work, especially the inside of casks.
howitzer
A gun so short that the projectile, which was hollow, could be put in its place by hand; a kind of mortar.
hubner
A mineral of brownish black color, occurring in columnar or foliated masses. It is native manganese tungstate.
howve
A hood. See Houve.
howp
To cry out; to whoop.
howsoever
In what manner soever; to whatever degree or extent; however.
hoyman
One who navigates a hoy.
hubbub
A loud noise of many confused voices; a tumult; uproar.
huddle
To press together promiscuously, from confusion, apprehension, or the like; to crowd together confusedly; to press or hurry in disorder; to crowd.
huchen
A large salmon (Salmo, / Salvelinus, hucho) inhabiting the Danube; -- called also huso, and bull trout.
huck
To higgle in trading.
hudge
An iron bucket for hoisting coal or ore.
hudsonian
Of or pertaining to Hudson's Bay or to the Hudson River; as, the Hudsonian curlew.
humanate
Indued with humanity.
huguenot
A French Protestant of the period of the religious wars in France in the 16th century.
huff
To swell; to enlarge; to puff up; as, huffed up with air.
hueless
Destitute of color.
huer
One who cries out or gives an alarm; specifically, a balker; a conder. See Balker.
huge
Very large; enormous; immense; excessive; -- used esp. of material bulk, but often of qualities, extent, etc.
hugger
One who hugs or embraces.
hulk
The body of a ship or decked vessel of any kind; esp., the body of an old vessel laid by as unfit for service.
huke
An outer garment worn in Europe in the Middle Ages.
hulchy
Swollen; gibbous.
hull
The outer covering of anything, particularly of a nut or of grain; the outer skin of a kernel; the husk.
hulver
Holly, an evergreen shrub or tree.
humor
Moisture, especially, the moisture or fluid of animal bodies, as the chyle, lymph, etc.; as, the humors of the eye, etc.
humectate
To moisten; to wet.
humble
Near the ground; not high or lofty; not pretentious or magnificent; unpretending; unassuming; as, a humble cottage.
humdrum
Monotonous; dull; commonplace.
humic
Pertaining to, or derived from, vegetable mold; as, humic acid. See Humin.
hummel
To separate from the awns; -- said of barley.
humulin
An extract of hops.
hump
A protuberance; especially, the protuberance formed by a crooked back.
humstrum
An instrument out of tune or rudely constructed; music badly played.
hundred
A division of a country in England, supposed to have originally contained a hundred families, or freemen.
hunch
A hump; a protuberance.
hung
Imp. & p. p. of Hang.
jacent
Lying at length; as, the jacent posture.
inept
Not apt or fit; unfit; unsuitable; improper; unbecoming.
idol
An image or representation of anything.
hyphae
The long, branching filaments of which the mycelium (and the greater part of the plant) of a fungus is formed.
hybrid
The offspring of the union of two distinct species; an animal or plant produced from the mixture of two species.
huso
The huchen, a large salmon.
hurr
To make a rolling or burring sound.
hurkaru
In India, a running footman; a messenger.
hunt
To search diligently after; to seek; to pursue; to follow; -- often with out or up; as, to hunt up the facts; to hunt out evidence.
hurden
A coarse kind of linen; -- called also harden.
hurl
To send whirling or whizzing through the air; to throw with violence; to drive with great force; as, to hurl a stone or lance.
hurons
; sing. Huron. (Ethnol.) A powerful and warlike tribe of North American Indians of the Algonquin stock.
husband
The male head of a household; one who orders the economy of a family.
hurst
A wood or grove; -- a word used in the composition of many names, as in Hazlehurst.
hurt
A band on a trip-hammer helve, bearing the trunnions.
hush
To still; to silence; to calm; to make quiet; to repress the noise or clamor of.
husk
The supporting frame of a run of millstones.
huyghenian
Pertaining to, or invented by, Christian Huyghens, a Dutch astronomer of the seventeenth century; as, the Huyghenian telescope.
huswife
A female housekeeper; a woman who manages domestic affairs; a thirfty woman.
hussar
Originally, one of the national cavalry of Hungary and Croatia; now, one of the light cavalry of European armies.
hustings
Any one of the temporary courts held for the election of members of the British Parliament.
hutch
To place in huts; to live in huts; as, to hut troops in winter quarters.
huttonian
Relating to what is now called the Plutonic theory of the earth, first advanced by Dr. James Hutton.
hyalea
A pteroid of the genus Cavolina. See Pteropoda, and Illustration in Appendix.
huzz
To buzz; to murmur.
hyacinth
A bulbous plant of the genus Hyacinthus, bearing beautiful spikes of fragrant flowers. H. orientalis is a common variety.
hyblaean
Pertaining to Hybla, an ancient town of Sicily, famous for its bees.
hybodus
An extinct genus of sharks having conical, compressed teeth.
hymar
The wild ass of Persia.
hygeia
The goddess of health, daughter of Esculapius.
hyemal
Belonging to winter; done in winter.
hydage
A land tax. See Hidage.
hydra
Hence: A multifarious evil, or an evil having many sources; not to be overcome by a single effort.
hyena
Any carnivorous mammal of the family Hyaenidae, of which three living species are known. They are large and strong, but cowardly.
hyetal
Of or pertaining to rain; descriptive of the distribution of rain, or of rainy regions.
hyke
See Haik, and Huke.
hygienic
Of or pertaining to health or hygiene; sanitary.
hygrine
An alkaloid associated with cocaine in coca leaves (Erythroxylon coca), and extracted as a thick, yellow oil, having a pungent taste and odor.
hylic
Of or pertaining to matter; material; corporeal; as, hylic influences.
hylobate
Any species of the genus Hylobates; a gibbon, or long-armed ape. See Gibbon.
hyomental
Between the hyoid bone and the lower jaw, pertaining to them; suprahyoid; submaxillary; as, the hyomental region of the front of the neck.
hyne
A servant. See Hine.
hymen
A fold of muscous membrane often found at the orifice of the vagina; the vaginal membrane.
hymn
To praise in song; to worship or extol by singing hymns; to sing.
hyoglossal
Pertaining to or connecting the tongue and hyodean arch; as, the hyoglossal membrane.
hyoid
Having the form of an arch, or of the Greek letter upsilon [/].
hypethral
Exposed to the air; wanting a roof; -- applied to a building or part of a building.
hyopastron
The second lateral plate in the plastron of turtles; -- called also hyosternum.
hyoscine
An alkaloid found with hyoscyamine (with which it is also isomeric) in henbane, and extracted as a white, amorphous, semisolid substance.
hypanthium
A fruit consisting in large part of a receptacle, enlarged below the calyx, as in the Calycanthus, the rose hip, and the pear.
hyperaemia
A superabundance or congestion of blood in an organ or part of the body.
iced
Covered with ice; chilled with ice; as, iced water.
hysterical
Of or pertaining to hysteria; affected, or troubled, with hysterics; convulsive, fitful.
hypural
Under the tail; -- applied to the bones which support the caudal fin rays in most fishes.
hypo
Sodium hyposulphite, or thiosulphate, a solution of which is used as a bath to wash out the unchanged silver salts in a picture.
hypinosis
A diminution in the normal amount of fibrin present in the blood.
hypnagogic
Leading to sleep; -- applied to the illusions of one who is half asleep.
hyppish
Affected with hypochondria; hypped.
hypsiloid
Resembling the Greek letter / in form; hyoid.
hyrst
A wood. See Hurst.
hyracoid
Of or pertaining to the Hyracoidea.
hyrcan
Of or pertaining to Hyrcania, an ancient country or province of Asia, southeast of the Caspian (which was also called the Hyrcanian) Sea.
hyson
A fragrant kind of green tea.
hyssop
A plant (Hyssopus officinalis). The leaves have an aromatic smell, and a warm, pungent taste.
iberian
Of or pertaining to Iberia.
iamb
An iambus or iambic.
hythe
A small haven. See Hithe.
iamatology
Materia Medica; that branch of therapeutics which treats of remedies.
ianthina
Any gastropod of the genus Ianthina, of which various species are found living in mid ocean; -- called also purple shell, and violet snail.
iatrical
Of or pertaining to medicine, or to medical men.
ibis
Any bird of the genus Ibis and several allied genera, of the family Ibidae, inhabiting both the Old World and the New.
ibex
One of several species of wild goats having very large, recurved horns, transversely ridged in front; -- called also steinbok.
ibidem
In the same place; -- abbreviated ibid. or ib.
icarian
Soaring too high for safety, like Icarus; adventurous in flight.
iceberg
A large mass of ice, generally floating in the ocean.
icosandria
A Linnaean class of plants, having twenty or more stamens inserted in the calyx.
ichor
An ethereal fluid that supplied the place of blood in the veins of the gods.
iceman
A man who is skilled in traveling upon ice, as among glaciers.
icefall
A frozen waterfall, or mass of ice resembling a frozen waterfall.
icelander
A native, or one of the Scandinavian people, of Iceland.
icequake
The crash or concussion attending the breaking up of masses of ice, -- often due to contraction from extreme cold.
ichneumon
Any carnivorous mammal of the genus Herpestes, and family Viverridae. Numerous species are found in Asia and Africa.
icily
In an icy manner; coldly.
ichthidin
A substance from the egg yolk of osseous fishes.
icicle
A pendent, and usually conical, mass of ice, formed by freezing of dripping water; as, the icicles on the eaves of a house.
iciness
The state or quality of being icy or very cold; frigidity.
icon
An image or representation; a portrait or pretended portrait.
idem
The same; the same as above; -- often abbreviated id.
ictus
The stress of voice laid upon accented syllable of a word.  Cf. Arsis.
icteric
A remedy for the jaundice.
ictic
Pertaining to, or caused by, a blow; sudden; abrupt.
idalian
Of or pertaining to Idalium, a mountain city in Cyprus, or to Venus, to whom it was sacred.
idea
A general notion, or a conception formed by generalization.
ides
The fifteenth day of March, May, July, and October, and the thirteenth day of the other months.
identical
The same; the selfsame; the very same; not different; as, the identical person or thing.
ideogeny
The science which treats of the origin of ideas.
idle
Of no account; useless; vain; trifling; unprofitable; thoughtless; silly; barren.
idioblast
An individual cell, differing greatly from its neighbours in regard to size, structure, or contents.
idly
In a idle manner; ineffectually; vainly; lazily; carelessly; (Obs.) foolishly.
immune
Exempt; protected by inoculation.
illabile
Incapable of falling or erring; infalliable.
ileac
Pertaining to the ileum.
igloo
An Eskimo snow house.
idumean
Of or pertaining to ancient Idumea, or Edom, in Western Asia.
idoneous
Appropriate; suitable; proper; fit; adequate.
idrialite
A bituminous substance obtained from the mercury mines of Idria, where it occurs mixed with cinnabar.
idyllic
Of or belonging to idyls.
igasuric
Pertaining to, or obtained from, nux vomica or St. Ignatius's bean; as, igasuric acid.
ignoble
Of low birth or family; not noble; not illustrious; plebeian; common; humble.
igneous
Pertaining to, having the nature of, fire; containing fire; resembling fire; as, an igneous appearance.
ignicolist
A worshiper of fire.
iguanian
Resembling, or pertaining to, the iguana.
ihram
The peculiar dress worn by pilgrims to Mecca.
ilial
Pertaining to the ilium; iliac.
ilex
The holm oak (Quercus Ilex).
ileocaecal
Pertaining to the ileum and caecum.
ileum
The last, and usually the longest, division of the small intestine; the part between the jejunum and large intestine.
iliac
Pertaining to ancient Ilium, or Troy.
liad
A celebrated Greek epic poem, in twenty-four books, on the destruction of Ilium, the ancient Troy. The Iliad is ascribed to Homer.
ilium
The dorsal one of the three principal bones comprising either lateral half of the pelvis; the dorsal or upper part of the hip bone.
ilicic
Pertaining to, or derived from, the holly (Ilex), and allied plants; as, ilicic acid.
iliolumbar
Pertaining to the iliac and lumbar regions; as, the iliolumbar artery.
ilixanthin
A yellow dye obtained from the leaves of the holly.
ilkoon
Each one; every one.
imban
To put under a ban.
illude
To play upon by artifice; to deceive; to mock; to excite and disappoint the hopes of.
illness
The condition of being ill, evil, or bad; badness; unfavorableness.
illegality
The quality or condition of being illegal; unlawfulness; as, the illegality of trespass or of false imprisonment; also, an illegal act.
illiberal
Not liberal; not free or generous; close; niggardly; mean; sordid.
illocality
Want of locality or place.
illtreat
To treat cruelly or improperly; to ill use; to maltreat.
image
Hence: The likeness of anything to which worship is paid; an idol.
ilmenite
Titanic iron. See Menaccanite.
ilvaite
A silicate of iron and lime occurring in black prismatic crystals and columnar masses.
imaum
Among the Mohammedans, a minister or priest who performs the regular service of the mosque.
imaret
A lodging house for Mohammedan pilgrims.
imesatin
A dark yellow, crystalline substance, obtained by the action of ammonia on isatin.
imbody
To become corporeal; to assume the qualities of a material body. See Embody.
imbecile
Destitute of strength, whether of body or mind; feeble; impotent; esp., mentally wea; feeble-minded; as, hospitals for the imbecile and insane.
imbibe
To drink in; to absorb; to suck or take in; to receive as by drinking; as, a person imbibes drink, or a sponge imbibes moisture.
imbrangle
To entangle as in a cobweb; to mix confusedly.
imbue
To tinge deeply; to dye; to cause to absorb; as, clothes thoroughly imbued with black.
immaculate
Without stain or blemish; spotless; undefiled; clear; pure.
imido
Pertaining to, containing, or combined with, the radical NH, which is called the imido group.
imitable
Capble of being imitated or copied.
immigrant
One who immigrates; one who comes to a country for the purpose of permanent residence; -- correlative of emigrant.
immediacy
The relation of freedom from the interventionof a medium; immediateness.
immobile
Incapable of being moved; immovable; fixed; stable.
inbeing
Inherence; inherent existence.
inaccuracy
The quality of being inaccurate; want of accuracy or exactness.
implacable
Not placable; not to be appeased; incapable of being pacified; inexorable; as, an implacable prince.
imphee
The African sugar cane (Holcus saccharatus), -- resembling the sorghum, or Chinese sugar cane.
impacable
Not to be appeased or quieted.
impeach
To hinder; to impede; to prevent.
impictured
Pictured; impressed.
imppiteous
Pitiless; cruel.
impuberal
Not having arrived at puberty; immature.
impoison
To poison; to imbitter; to impair.
imprecate
To call down by prayer, as something hurtful or calamitous.
imrigh
A peculiar strong soup or broth, made in Scotland.
inability
The quality or state of being unable; lack of ability; want of sufficient power, strength, resources, or capacity.
inapathy
Sensibility; feeling; -- opposed to apathy.
inaidable
Incapable of being assisted; helpless.
inadequacy
The quality or state of being inadequate or insufficient; defectiveness; insufficiency; inadequateness.
inaffable
Not affable; reserved in social intercourse.
inamorata
A woman in love; a mistress.
inane
Without contents; empty; void of sense or intelligence; purposeless; pointless; characterless; useless.
inasmuch
In like degree; in like manner; seeing that; considering that; since; -- followed by as. See In as much as, under In, prep.
inaquate
Embodied in, or changed into, water.
inarching
A method of ingrafting. See Inarch.
inaudible
Not audible; incapable of being heard; silent.
inbarge
To embark; to go or put into a barge.
incubate
To sit, as on eggs for hatching; to brood; to brood upon, or keep warm, as eggs, for the purpose of hatching.
incend
To inflame; to excite.
inbreaking
A breaking in; inroad; invasion.
inblown
Blown in or into.
inboard
Inside the line of a vessel's bulwarks or hull; the opposite of outboard; as, an inboard cargo; haul the boom inboard.
inburnt
Burnt in; ineffaceable.
inca
The people governed by the Incas, now represented by the Quichua tribe.
inclasp
To clasp within; to hold fast to; to embrace or encircle.
inch
An island; -- often used in the names of small islands off the coast of Scotland, as in Inchcolm, Inchkeith, etc.
incide
To cut; to separate and remove; to resolve or break up, as by medicines.
incoacted
Not compelled; unconstrained.
incrassate
To become thick or thicker.
indubious
Not dubious or doubtful; certain.
india
A country in Southern Asia; the two peninsulas of Hither and Farther India; in a restricted sense, Hither India, or Hindostan.
indagate
To seek or search out.
inde
Azure-colored; of a bright blue color.
indoBriton
A person born in India, of mixed Indian and British blood; a half-caste.
indraught
An opening from the sea into the land; an inlet.
inedited
Not edited; unpublished; as, an inedited manuscript.
indwell
To dwell in; to abide within; to remain in possession.
inebriant
Anything that intoxicates, as opium, alcohol, etc.; an intoxicant.
ineffable
Incapable of being expresses in words; unspeakable; unutterable; indescribable; as, the ineffable joys of heaven.
inee
An arrow poison, made from an apocynaceous plant (Strophanthus hispidus) of the Gaboon country; -- called also onaye.
inelegancy
The quality of being inelegant; want of elegance or grace; want of refinement, beauty, or polish in language, composition, or manners.
inutile
Useless; unprofitable.
inmeats
The edible viscera of animals, as the heart, liver, etc.
inhiation
A gaping after; eager desire; craving.
infra
Below; beneath; under; after; -- often used as a prefix.
ineye
To ingraft, as a tree or plant, by the insertion of a bud or eye; to inoculate.
inescate
To allure; to lay a bait for.
inequal
Unequal; uneven; various.
inermis
Unarmed; destitute of prickles or thorns, as a leaf.
inevasible
Incapable of being evaded; inevitable; unavoidable.
inexact
Not exact; not precisely correct or true; inaccurate.
infidelity
Unfaithfulness to the marriage vow or contract; violation of the marriage covenant by adultery.
infallible
Not fallible; not capable of erring; entirely exempt from liability to mistake; unerring; inerrable.
infeasible
Not capable of being done or accomplished; impracticable.
inflame
To set on fire; to kindle; to cause to burn, flame, or glow.
infold
To wrap up or cover with folds; to envelop; to inwrap; to inclose; to involve.
ingle
Flame; blaze; a fire; a fireplace.
ingelable
Not congealable.
infucate
To stain; to paint; to daub.
ingate
Entrance; ingress.
inghalla
The reedbuck of South Africa.
ingirt
To encircle to gird; to engirt.
inguinal
Of or pertaining to, or in the region of, the inguen or groin; as, an inguinal canal or ligament; inguinal hernia.
ingot
That in which metal is cast; a mold.
ingracious
Ungracious; unkind.
inhabile
Not apt or fit; unfit; not convenient; inappropriate; unsuitable; as, inhabile matter.
inhearse
To put in, or as in, a hearse or coffin.
inker
One who, or that which, inks; especially, in printing, the pad or roller which inks the type.
iniquitous
Characterized by iniquity; unjust; wicked; as, an iniquitous bargain; an iniquitous proceeding.
inia
A South American freshwater dolphin (Inia Boliviensis). It is ten or twelve feet long, and has a hairy snout.
inhold
To have inherent; to contain in itself; to possess.
inhuman
Destitute of the kindness and tenderness that belong to a human being; cruel; barbarous; savage; unfeeling; as, an inhuman person or people.
inimical
Having the disposition or temper of an enemy; unfriendly; unfavorable; -- chiefly applied to private, as hostile is to public, enmity.
inion
The external occipital protuberance of the skull.
inject
Fig.: To throw; to offer; to propose; to instill.
inisle
To form into an island; to surround.
initial
Of or pertaining to the beginning; marking the commencement; incipient; commencing; as, the initial symptoms of a disease.
injoint
To join; to unite.
injudicial
Not according to the forms of law; not judicial.
inkstand
A small vessel for holding ink, to dip the pen into; also, a device for holding ink and writing materials.
inkiness
The state or quality of being inky; blackness.
inkfish
A cuttlefish. See Cuttlefish.
inkhorn
A small bottle of horn or other material formerly used for holding ink; an inkstand; a portable case for writing materials.
inkle
A kind of tape or braid.
inkneed
See Knock-kneed.
inleague
To ally, or form an alliance witgh; to unite; to combine.
inky
Consisting of, or resembling, ink; soiled with ink; black.
inlace
To work in, as lace; to embellish with work resembling lace; also, to lace or enlace.
inly
Internal; interior; secret.
inlock
To lock in, or inclose.
inmacy
The state of being an inmate.
inscience
Want of knowledge; ignorance.
inofficial
Not official; not having official sanction or authoriy; not according to the forms or ceremony of official business; as, inofficial intelligence.
innocence
The state or quality of being innocent; freedom from that which is harmful or infurious; harmlessness.
inner
Further in; interior; internal; not outward; as, an spirit or its phenomena.
inmost
Deepest within; farthest from the surface or external part; innermost.
innate
Inborn; native; natural; as, innate vigor; innate eloquence.
innholder
One who keeps an inn.
inning
Ingathering; harvesting.
inobedient
Not obedient; disobedient.
innuendo
An oblique hint; a remote allusion or reference, usually derogatory to a person or thing not named; an insinuation.
innyard
The yard adjoining an inn.
inocarpin
A red, gummy, coloring matter, extracted from the colorless juice of the Otaheite chestnut (Inocarpus edulis).
inodiate
To make odious or hateful.
inquest
Inquiry; quest; search.
inordinacy
The state or quality of being inordinate; excessiveness; immoderateness; as, the inordinacy of love or desire.
inogen
A complex nitrogenous substance, which, by Hermann's hypothesis, is continually decomposed and reproduced in the muscles, during their life.
inopinable
Not to be expected; inconceivable.
inosculate
To unite by apposition or contact, as two tubular vessels at their extremities; to anastomose.
inoxidize
To prevent or hinder oxidation, rust, or decay; as, inoxidizing oils or varnishes.
inroad
The entrance of an enemy into a country with purposes of hostility; a sudden or desultory incursion or invasion; raid; encroachment.
inracinate
To enroot or implant.
inregister
To register; to enter, as in a register.
inrunning
The act or the place of entrance; an inlet.
insafety
Insecurity; danger.
inrecision
A cutting off, through, or asunder; interruption.
inspan
To yoke or harness, as oxen to a vehicle.
inside
Within the sides of; in the interior; contained within; as, inside a house, book, bottle, etc.
inseam
To impress or mark with a seam or cicatrix.
inshaded
Marked with different shades.
insnare
To catch in a snare; to entrap; to take by artificial means.
insobriety
Want of sobriety, moderation, or calmness; intemperance; drunkenness.
inswathe
To wrap up; to infold; to swathe.
instable
Not stable; not standing fast or firm; unstable; prone to change or recede from a purpose; mutable; inconstant.
insuavity
Want of suavity; unpleasantness.
intact
Untouched, especially by anything that harms, defiles, or the like; uninjured; undefiled; left complete or entire.
integer
A complete entity; a whole number, in contradistinction to a fraction or a mixed number.
intubation
The introduction of a tube into an organ to keep it open, as into the larynx in croup.
intimacy
The state of being intimate; close familiarity or association; nearness in friendship.
interclose
To shut in; to inclose.
inthirst
To make thirsty.
into
To the inside of; within. It is used in a variety of applications.
intracolic
Within the colon; as, the intracolic valve.
inumbrate
To shade; to darken.
intwine
To twine or twist into, or together; to wreathe; as, a wreath of flowers intwined.
inuloid
A substance resembling inulin, found in the unripe bulbs of the dahila.
inurbane
Uncivil; unpolished; rude.
inundate
To cover with a flood; to overflow; to deluge; to flood; as, the river inundated the town.
inustion
The act of burning or branding.
ischial
Of or pertaining to the ischium or hip; ischiac; ischiadic; ischiatic.
irade
A decree of the Sultan.
iodal
An oily liquid, Cl3.CHO, analogous to chloral and bromal.
inwall
To inclose or fortify as with a wall.
invidious
Envious; malignant.
invade
To go into or upon; to pass within the confines of; to enter; -- used of forcible or rude ingress.
invected
Having a border or outline composed of semicircles with the convexity outward; -- the opposite of engrailed.
invocate
To invoke; to call on, or for, in supplication; to implore.
invulgar
To cause to become or appear vulgar.
inwork
To work in or within.
inweave
To weave in or together; to intermix or intertwine by weaving; to interlace.
inwit
Inward sense; mind; understanding; conscience.
itworn
Worn, wrought, or stamped in.
inwrap
To cover by wrapping; to involve; to infold; as, to inwrap in a cloak, in smoke, etc.
ionian
Of or pertaining to Ionia or the Ionians; Ionic.
iodoform
A yellow, crystalline, volatile substance, CI3H, having an offensive odor and sweetish taste, and analogous to chloroform.
iodhydrin
One of a series of compounds containing iodine, and analogous to the chlorhydrins.
iodic
To, or containing, iodine; specif., denoting those compounds in which it has a relatively high valence; as, iodic acid.
iodyrite
Silver iodide, a mineral of a yellowish color.
iolite
A silicate of alumina, iron, and magnesia, having a bright blue color and vitreous luster; cordierite.
ipecac
An abbreviation of Ipecacuanha, and in more frequent use.
iota
The ninth letter of the Greek alphabet (/) corresponding with the English i.
iowas
A tribe of Indians which formerly occupied the region now included in the State of Iowa.
ipomoea
A genus of twining plants with showy monopetalous flowers, including the morning-glory, the sweet potato, and the cypress vine.
iracund
Irascible; choleric.
iron
An instrument or utensil made of iron; -- chiefly in composition; as, a flatiron, a smoothing iron, etc.
irestone
Any very hard rock.
irate
Angry; incensed; enraged.
iran
The native name of Persia.
irascible
Prone to anger; easily provoked or inflamed to anger; choleric; irritable; as, an irascible man; an irascible temper or mood.
ireful
Full of ire; angry; wroth.
irenarch
An officer in the Greek empire having functions corresponding to those of a justice of the peace.
iris
The goddess of the rainbow, and swift-footed messenger of the gods.
irian
Of or pertaining to the iris.
iridal
Of or pertaining to the iris or rainbow; prismatic; as, the iridal colors.
iritis
An inflammation of the iris of the eye.
irksome
Wearisome; tedious; disagreeable or troublesome by reason of long continuance or repetition; as, irksome hours; irksome tasks.
irrigate
To water; to wet; to moisten with running or dropping water; to bedew.
irpe
A fantastic grimace or contortion of the body.
iroquois
A powerful and warlike confederacy of Indian tribes, formerly inhabiting Central New York and constituting most of the Five Nations.
irous
Irascible; passionate.
irradiancy
The act of irradiating; emission of rays of light.
irregular
One who is not regular; especially, a soldier not in regular service.
irvingite
The common designation of one a sect founded by the Rev. Edward Irving (about 1830), who call themselves the Catholic Apostolic Church.
irrorate
To sprinkle or moisten with dew; to bedew.
irrubrical
Contrary to the rubric; not rubrical.
isagelous
Containing the same information; as, isagelous sentences.
isabelline
Of an isabel or isabella color.
isatinic
Pertaining to, or derived from, isatin; as, isatic acid, which is also called trioxindol.
issuable
Leading to, producing, or relating to, an issue; capable of being made an issue at law.
isodynamic
Of, pertaining to, having, or denoting, equality of force.
isis
The principal goddess worshiped by the Egyptians. She was regarded as the mother of Horus, and the sister and wife of Osiris.
isiac
Pertaining to the goddess Isis; as, Isiac mysteries.
isentropic
Having equal entropy.
ishmaelite
One at enmity with society; a wanderer; a vagabond; an outcast.
isidorian
Pertaining, or ascribed, to Isidore; as, the Isidorian decretals, a spurious collection of decretals published in the ninth century.
isinglass
A popular name for mica, especially when in thin sheets.
ismaelite
One of a sect of Mohammedans who favored the pretensions of the family of Mohammed ben Ismael, of the house Ali.
islam
The religion of the Mohammedans; Mohammedanism; Islamism. Their formula of faith is: There is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet.
isle
A spot within another of a different color, as upon the wings of some insects.
isobaric
Denoting equal pressure; as, an isobaric line; specifically, of or pertaining to isobars.
isochasm
A line connecting places on the earth's surface at which there is the same mean frequency of auroras.
isopathy
The system which undertakes to cure a disease by means of the virus of the same disease.
isolable
Capable of being isolated, or of being obtained in a pure state; as, gold is isolable.
isogonic
Pertaining to, or noting, equal angles.
isohyetose
Of or pertaining to lines connecting places on the earth's surface which have a mean annual rainfall.
isomer
A body or compound which is isomeric with another body or compound; a member of an isomeric series.
isonandra
A genus of sapotaceous trees of India. Isonandra Gutta is the principal source of gutta-percha.
isotheral
Having the nature of an isothere; indicating the distribution of temperature by means of an isothere; as, an isotheral chart or line.
isorcin
A crystalline hydrocarbon derivative, metameric with orcin, but produced artificially; -- called also cresorcin.
isosceles
Having two legs or sides that are equal; -- said of a triangle.
isouric
Pertaining to, or designating, a complex nitrogenous acid, isomeric with uric acid.
israelite
A descendant of Israel, or Jacob; a Hebrew; a Jew.
ivied
Overgrown with ivy.
item
Also; as an additional article.
itacist
One who is in favor of itacism.
isthmian
Of or pertaining to an isthmus, especially to the Isthmus of Corinth, in Greece.
isuret
An artificial nitrogenous base, isomeric with urea, and forming a white crystalline substance; -- called also isuretine.
itala
An early Latin version of the Scriptures (the Old Testament was translated from the Septuagint, and was also called the Italic version).
itch
To have an uneasy sensation in the skin, which inclines the person to scratch the part affected.
itself
The neuter reciprocal pronoun of It; as, the thing is good in itself; it stands by itself.
iter
A passage; esp., the passage between the third and fourth ventricles in the brain; the aqueduct of Sylvius.
itineracy
The act or practice of itinerating; itinerancy.
itzibu
A silver coin of Japan, worth about thirty-four cents.
iulidan
One of the Iulidae, a family of myriapods, of which the genus Iulus is the type. See Iulus.
izedi
One of an Oriental religious sect which worships Satan or the Devil.
ixia
A South African bulbous plant of the Iris family, remarkable for the brilliancy of its flowers.
ivoride
A composition resembling ivory in appearance and used as a substitute for it.
iwis
Indeed; truly. See Ywis.
ixodes
A genus of parasitic Acarina, which includes various species of ticks. See Tick, the insect.
izard
A variety of the chamois found in the Pyrenees.
jabiru
One of several large wading birds of the genera Mycteria and Xenorhynchus, allied to the storks in form and habits.
izzard
The letter z; -- formerly so called.
jabber
To talk rapidly, indistinctly, or unintelligibly; to utter gibberish or nonsense; to chatter.
jacana
Any of several wading birds belonging to the genus Jacana and several allied genera, all of which have spurs on the wings.
jaborandi
The native name of a South American rutaceous shrub (Pilocarpus pennatifolius). The leaves are used in medicine as an diaphoretic and sialogogue.
jacchus
The common marmoset (Hapale vulgaris). Formerly, the name was also applied to other species of the same genus.
kafir
One of a race inhabiting Kafiristan in Central Asia.
jilt
A woman who capriciously deceives her lover; a coquette; a flirt.
jawy
Relating to the jaws.
janitor
A door-keeper; a porter; one who has the care of a public building, or a building occupied for offices, suites of rooms, etc.
jaina
One of a numerous sect in British India, holding the tenets of Jainism.
jade
A mean or tired horse; a worthless nag.
jacquard
Pertaining to, or invented by, Jacquard, a French mechanician, who died in 1834.
jack
A familiar nickname of, or substitute for, John.
jacob
A Hebrew patriarch (son of Isaac, and ancestor of the Jews), who in a vision saw a ladder reaching up to heaven (Gen.
jactancy
A boasting; a bragging.
jaculable
Fit for throwing.
jagged
Having jags; having rough, sharp notches, protuberances, or teeth; cleft; laciniate; divided; as, jagged rocks.
jadish
Vicious; ill-tempered; resembling a jade; -- applied to a horse.
jager
A sharpshooter. See Yager.
jaghirdar
The holder of a jaghir.
jailer
The keeper of a jail or prison.
jamaica
One of the West India is islands.
jako
An African parrot (Psittacus erithacus), very commonly kept as a cage bird; -- called also gray parrot.
jairou
The ahu or Asiatic gazelle.
jakie
A South American striped frog (Pseudis paradoxa), remarkable for having a tadpole larger than the adult, and hence called also paradoxical frog.
jalap
The tubers of the Mexican plant Ipomoea purga (or Exogonium purga), a climber much like the morning-glory.
jalons
Long poles, topped with wisps of straw, used as landmarks and signals.
jamesonite
A steel-gray mineral, of metallic luster, commonly fibrous massive. It is a sulphide of antimony and lead, with a little iron.
jamb
Any thick mass of rock which prevents miners from following the lode or vein.
jamdani
A silk fabric, with a woven pattern of sprigs of flowers.
jane
A coin of Genoa; any small coin.
jangle
To sound harshly or discordantly, as bells out of tune.
jarl
A chief; an earl; in English history, one of the leaders in the Danish and Norse invasions.
jape
To jest; to play tricks; to jeer.
jantu
A machine of great antiquity, used in Bengal for raising water to irrigate land.
janker
A long pole on two wheels, used in hauling logs.
jansenism
The doctrine of Jansen regarding free will and divine grace.
january
The first month of the year, containing thirty-one days.
japan
Work varnished and figured in the Japanese manner; also, the varnish or lacquer used in japanning.
jarble
To wet; to bemire.
japhetite
A descendant of Japheth.
japonica
A species of Camellia (Camellia Japonica), a native of Japan, bearing beautiful red or white flowers.
jardiniere
An ornamental stand or receptacle for plants, flowers, etc., used as a piece of decorative furniture in room.
jargle
To emit a harsh or discordant sound.
jatrophic
Of or pertaining to physic nuts, the seeds of plants of the genus Jatropha.
jarvy
The driver of a hackney coach.
jarosite
An ocher-yellow mineral occurring on minute rhombohedral crystals. It is a hydrous sulphate of iron and potash.
jarrah
The mahoganylike wood of the Australian Eucalyptus marginata. See Eucalyptus.
jasey
A wig; -- so called, perhaps, from being made of, or resembling, Jersey yarn.
jasper
An opaque, impure variety of quartz, of red, yellow, and other dull colors, breaking with a smooth surface.
javelin
To pierce with a javelin.
jaunce
To ride hard; to jounce.
java
One of the islands of the Malay Archipelago belonging to the Netherlands.
jawed
Having jaws; -- chiefly in composition; as, lantern-jawed.
jawbone
The bone of either jaw; a maxilla or a mandible.
jawing
Scolding; clamorous or abusive talk.
jermoonal
The Himalayan now partridge.
jelerang
A large, handsome squirrel (Sciurus Javensis), native of Java and Southern Asia; -- called also Java squirrel.
jears
See 1st Jeer (b).
jealous
Zealous; solicitous; vigilant; anxiously watchful.
jayhawker
A name given to a free-booting, unenlisted, armed man or guerrilla.
jazel
A gem of an azure color.
jeames
A footman; a flunky.
jean
A twilled cotton cloth.
jehovist
One who maintains that the vowel points of the word Jehovah, in Hebrew, are the proper vowels of that word; -- opposed to adonist.
jeel
A morass; a shallow lake.
jeer
A gear; a tackle.
jehu
A coachman; a driver; especially, one who drives furiously.
jejunal
Pertaining to the jejunum.
jentling
A fish of the genus Leuciscus; the blue chub of the Danube.
jeniquen
A Mexican name for the Sisal hemp (Agave rigida, var. Sisalana); also, its fiber.
jellied
Brought to the state or consistence of jelly.
jemmy
A short crowbar. See Jimmy.
jenkins
Name of contempt for a flatterer of persons high in social or official life; as, the Jenkins employed by a newspaper.
jennet
A small Spanish horse; a genet.
jerboa
Any small jumping rodent of the genus Dipus, esp. D. Aegyptius, which is common in Egypt and the adjacent countries.
jeofail
An oversight in pleading, or the acknowledgment of a mistake or oversight.
jeopard
To put in jeopardy; to expose to loss or injury; to imperil; to hazard.
jereed
A blunt javelin used by the people of the Levant, especially in mock fights.
jerk
To cut into long slices or strips and dry in the sun; as, jerk beef. See Charqui.
jewel
An ornament of dress usually made of a precious metal, and having enamel or precious stones as a part of its design.
jessant
Springing up or emerging; -- said of a plant or animal.
jersey
The finest of wool separated from the rest; combed wool; also, fine yarn of wool.
jeronymite
One belonging of the mediaeval religious orders called Hermits of St. Jerome.
jerquer
A customhouse officer who searches ships for unentered goods.
jerusalem
The chief city of Palestine, intimately associated with the glory of the Jewish nation, and the life and death of Jesus Christ.
jervine
A poisonous alkaloid resembling veratrine, and found with it in white hellebore (Veratrum album); -- called also jervina.
jeterus
A yellowness of the parts of plants which are normally green; yellows.
jest
A deed; an action; a gest.
jesuit
One of a religious order founded by Ignatius Loyola, and approved in 1540, under the title of The Society of Jesus.
jetson
Jettison. See Jettison, 1.
jetter
One who struts; one who bears himself jauntily; a fop.
jharal
A wild goat (Capra Jemlaica) which inhabits the loftiest mountains of India. It has long, coarse hair, forming a thick mane on its head and neck.
jewry
Judea; also, a district inhabited by Jews; a Jews' quarter.
jewfish
A very large serranoid fish (Promicrops itaiara) of Florida and the Gulf of Mexico. It often reaches the weight of five hundred pounds.
jewish
Of or pertaining to the Jews or Hebrews; characteristic of or resembling the Jews or their customs; Israelitish.
jewstone
A large clavate spine of a fossil sea urchin.
jezebel
A bold, vicious woman; a termagant.
jiffy
A moment; an instant; as, I will be ready in a jiffy.
jibber
A horse that jibs.
jibe
To shift, as the boom of a fore-and-aft sail, from one side of a vessel to the other when the wind is aft or on the quarter.
jigjog
A jolting motion; a jogging pace.
jigger
A species of flea (Sarcopsylla, / Pulex, penetrans), which burrows beneath the skin. See Chigoe.
jill
A young woman; a sweetheart. See Gill.
jubilant
Uttering songs of triumph; shouting with joy; triumphant; exulting.
jongler
In the Middle Ages, a court attendant or other person who, for hire, recited or sang verses, usually of his own composition.
jogging
The act of giving a jog or jogs; traveling at a jog.
jobation
A scolding; a hand, tedious reproof.
jingal
A small portable piece of ordnance, mounted on a swivel.
jimmy
A short crowbar used by burglars in breaking open doors.
jimp
Neat; handsome; elegant. See Gimp.
jinrikisha
A small, two-wheeled, hooded vehicle drawn by one more men.
jippo
A waistcoat or kind of stays for women.
jockey
A professional rider of horses in races.
jobber
One who works by the job.
jocantry
The act or practice of jesting.
jocose
Given to jokes and jesting; containing a joke, or abounding in jokes; merry; sportive; humorous.
jocular
Given to jesting; jocose; as, a jocular person.
jokingly
In a joking way; sportively.
join
To bring together, literally or figuratively; to place in contact; to connect; to couple; to unite; to combine; to associate; to add; to append.
johannean
Of or pertaining to John, esp. to the Apostle John or his writings.
john
A proper name of a man.
joist
To fit or furnish with joists.
joke
Something not said seriously, or not actually meant; something done in sport.
jolt
To shake with short, abrupt risings and fallings, as a carriage moving on rough ground; as, the coach jolts.
jolif
Joyful; merry; pleasant; jolly.
jollily
In a jolly manner.
jonah
The Hebrew prophet, who was cast overboard as one who endangered the ship; hence, any person whose presence is unpropitious.
jonesian
Of or pertaining to Jones.
journal
A diary; an account of daily transactions and events.
joss
A Chinese household divinity; a Chinese idol.
jorum
A large drinking vessel; also, its contents.
jonquille
A bulbous plant of the genus Narcissus (N. Jonquilla), allied to the daffodil. It has long, rushlike leaves, and yellow or white fragrant flowers.
jorden
A pot or vessel with a large neck, formerly used by physicians and alchemists.
joseph
An outer garment worn in the 18th century; esp., a woman's riding habit, buttoned down the front.
joso
A small gudgeon.
jougs
An iron collar fastened to a wall or post, formerly used in Scotland as a kind of pillory. [Written also juggs.
jostle
To run against and shake; to push out of the way; to elbow; to hustle; to disturb by crowding; to crowd against.
jotter
One who jots down memoranda.
jouissance
Jollity; merriment.
jounce
To jolt; to shake, especially by rough riding or by driving over obstructions.
joyace
Enjoyment; gayety; festivity; joyfulness.
jovial
Of or pertaining to the god, or the planet, Jupiter.
joust
To engage in mock combat on horseback, as two knights in the lists; to tilt.
jove
The chief divinity of the ancient Romans; Jupiter.
jowl
The cheek; the jaw.
jowter
A mounted peddler of fish; -- called also jouster.
joyous
Glad; gay; merry; joyful; also, affording or inspiring joy; with of before the word or words expressing the cause of joy.
joyful
Full of joy; having or causing joy; very glad; as, a joyful heart.
joyless
Not having joy; not causing joy; unenjoyable.
juba
The mane of an animal.
joysome
Causing joyfulness.
jube
Chancel screen or rood screen.
juncaceous
Of. pertaining to, or resembling, a natural order of plants (Juncaceae), of which the common rush (Juncus) is the type.
juise
Judgment; justice; sentence.
jugal
Relating to a yoke, or to marriage.
judean
Of or pertaining to Judea.
jucundity
Pleasantness; agreeableness. See Jocundity.
judahite
One of the tribe of Judah; a member of the kingdom of Judah; a Jew.
judge
A person appointed to decide in a/trial of skill, speed, etc., between two or more parties; an umpire; as, a judge in a horse race.
judicable
Capable of being judged; capable of being tried or decided upon.
juglandine
An alkaloid found in the leaves of the walnut (Juglans regia).
juger
A Roman measure of land, measuring 28,800 square feet, or 240 feet in length by 120 in breadth.
jugger
An East Indian falcon. See Lugger.
jugular
Of or pertaining to the throat or neck; as, the jugular vein.
juice
The characteristic fluid of any vegetable or animal substance; the sap or part which can be expressed from fruit, etc.
julus
A catkin or ament. See Ament.
julaceous
Like an ament, or bearing aments; amentaceous.
jujube
The sweet and edible drupes (fruits) of several Mediterranean and African species of small trees, of the genus Zizyphus, especially the Z.
juke
To bend the neck; to bow or duck the head.
julep
A refreshing drink flavored with aromatic herbs
julian
Relating to, or derived from, Julius Caesar.
jumble
To mix in a confused mass; to put or throw together without order; -- often followed by together or up.
july
The seventh month of the year, containing thirty-one days.
jumart
The fabled offspring of a bull and a mare.
jument
A beast; especially, a beast of burden.
jump
A kind of loose jacket for men.
jussi
A delicate fiber, produced in the Philippine Islands from an unidentified plant, of which dresses, etc.
jupiter
The supreme deity, king of gods and men, and reputed to be the son of Saturn and Rhea; Jove. He corresponds to the Greek Zeus.
junk
A fragment of any solid substance; a thick piece. See Chunk.
jungly
Consisting of jungles; abounding with jungles; of the nature of a jungle.
junior
Less advanced in age than another; younger.
june
The sister and wife of Jupiter, the queen of heaven, and the goddess who presided over marriage. She corresponds to the Greek Hera.
junta
A council; a convention; a tribunal; an assembly; esp., the grand council of state in Spain.
jurist
One who professes the science of law; one versed in the law, especially in the civil law; a writer on civil and international law.
juppon
A sleeveless jacket worn over the armor in the 14th century. It fitted closely, and descended below the hips.
jura
1. A range of mountains between France and Switzerland.
juror
A member of a jury; a juryman.
jury
For temporary use; -- applied to a temporary contrivance.
juvia
A Brazilian name for the lofty myrtaceous tree (Bertholetia excelsa) which produces the large seeds known as Brazil nuts.
jutlander
A native or inhabitant of Jutland in Denmark.
just
Rendering or disposed to render to each one his due; equitable; fair; impartial; as, just judge.
jute
The coarse, strong fiber of the East Indian Corchorus olitorius, and C. capsularis; also, the plant itself.
jutting
Projecting, as corbels, cornices, etc.
juvenile
Young; youthful; as, a juvenile appearance.
kabob
See Cabob, n. & v. t.
juwansa
The camel's thorn. See under Camel.
juxtapose
To place in juxtaposition.
kadiaster
A Turkish judge. See Cadi.
kabyle
A Berber, as in Algiers or Tunis. See Berber.
kafal
The Arabian name of two trees of the genus Balsamodendron, which yield a gum resin and a red aromatic wood.
kier
A large tub or vat in which goods are subjected to the action of hot lye or bleaching liquor; -- also called keeve.
keitloa
A black, two-horned, African rhinoceros (Atelodus keitloa). It has the posterior horn about as long as the anterior one, or even longer.
kapia
The fossil resin of the kauri tree of New Zealand.
kalmuck
A kind of shaggy cloth, resembling bearskin.
kaiser
The ancient title of emperors of Germany assumed by King William of Prussia when crowned sovereign of the new German empire in 1871.
kail
A kind of headless cabbage. Same as Kale, 1.
kage
A chantry chapel inclosed with lattice or screen work.
kahani
A kind of notary public, or attorney, in the Levant.
kain
Poultry, etc., required by the lease to be paid in kind by a tenant to his landlord.
kairine
A pale buff or white crystalline alkaloid derived from quinoline, and used as an antipyretic in medicine.
kale
A variety of cabbage in which the leaves do not form a head, being nearly the original or wild form of the species.
kaka
A New Zealand parrot of the genus Nestor, especially the brown parrot (Nestor meridionalis).
kalasie
A long-tailed monkey of Borneo (Semnopithecus rubicundus). It has a tuft of long hair on the head.
kali
The last and worst of the four ages of the world; -- considered to have begun B. C. 3102, and to last 432,000 years.
kalki
The name of Vishnu in his tenth and last avatar.
kanaka
A native of the Sandwich Islands.
kama
The Hindoo Cupid. He is represented as a beautiful youth, with a bow of sugar cane or flowers.
kalong
A fruit bat, esp. the Indian edible fruit bat (Pteropus edulis).
kalpa
One of the Brahmanic eons, a period of 4,320,000,000 years. At the end of each Kalpa the world is annihilated.
kampylite
A variety of mimetite or arseniate of lead in hexagonal prisms of a fine orange yellow.
khamsin
A hot southwesterly wind in Egypt, coming from the Sahara.
kantian
Of or pertaining to Immanuel Kant, the German philosopher; conformed or relating to any or all of the philosophical doctrines of Immanuel Kant.
kanchil
A small chevrotain of the genus Tragulus, esp. T. pygmaeus, or T. kanchil, inhabiting Java, Sumatra, and adjacent islands; a deerlet.
kand
Fluor spar; -- so called by Cornish miners.
kaoline
A very pure white clay, ordinarily in the form of an impalpable powder, and used to form the paste of porcelain; China clay; porcelain clay.
kapelle
A chapel; hence, the choir or orchestra of a prince's chapel; now, a musical establishment, usually orchestral.
kauri
A lofty coniferous tree of New Zealand Agathis, / Dammara, australis), furnishing valuable timber and yielding one kind of dammar resin.
karreo
One of the dry table-lands of South Africa, which often rise terracelike to considerable elevations.
karn
A pile of rocks; sometimes, the solid rock. See Cairn.
karagane
A species of gray fox found in Russia.
karmathian
One of a Mohammedan sect founded in the ninth century by Karmat.
karob
The twenty-fourth part of a grain; -- a weight used by goldsmiths.
karpholite
A fibrous mineral occurring in tufts of a straw-yellow color. It is a hydrous silicate of alumina and manganese.
kate
The brambling finch.
karvel
See Carvel, and Caravel.
katabolism
Destructive or downward metabolism; regressive metamorphism; -- opposed to anabolism. See Disassimilation.
kathetal
Making a right angle; perpendicular, as two lines or two sides of a triangle, which include a right angle.
katydid
A large, green, arboreal, orthopterous insect (Cyrtophyllus concavus) of the family Locustidae, common in the United States.
keck
To heave or to retch, as in an effort to vomit.
kayaker
One who uses a kayak.
kavass
An armed constable; also, a government servant or courier.
kawaka
A New Zealand tree, the Cypress cedar (Libocedrus Doniana), having a valuable, fine-grained, reddish wood.
kayles
A game; ninepins.
kaynard
A lazy or cowardly person; a rascal.
keel
To cool; to skim or stir.
kedge
To move (a vessel) by carrying out a kedge in a boat, dropping it overboard, and hauling the vessel up to it.
keech
A mass or lump of fat rolled up by the butcher.
keep
To care; to desire.
keen
Sharp; having a fine edge or point; as, a keen razor, or a razor with a keen edge.
keeve
A vat or tub in which the mash is made; a mash tub.
ketine
One of a series of organic bases obtained by the reduction of certain isonitroso compounds of the ketones.
kentle
A hundred weight; a quintal.
kemelin
A tub; a brewer's vessel.
keloid
Applied to a variety of tumor forming hard, flat, irregular excrescences upon the skin.
keld
Having a kell or covering; webbed.
kell
A sort of pottage; kale. See Kale, 2.
kelp
The calcined ashes of seaweed, -- formerly much used in the manufacture of glass, now used in the manufacture of iodine.
kelt
Cloth with the nap, generally of native black wool.
kennel
The water course of a street; a little canal or channel; a gutter; also, a puddle.
kempty
Coarse, rough hair wool or fur, injuring its quality.
kendal
A cloth colored green by dye obtained from the woad-waxen, formerly used by Flemish weavers at Kendal, in Westmoreland, England.
keno
A gambling game, a variety of the game of lotto, played with balls or knobs, numbered, and cards also numbered.
kenspeckle
Having so marked an appearance as easily to be recognized.
kern
Any kind of boor or low-lived person.
kerchered
Covered, or bound round, with a kercher.
kephalin
One of a group of nitrogenous phosphorized principles, supposed by Thudichum to exist in brain tissue.
kerana
A kind of long trumpet, used among the Persians.
kerf
A notch, channel, or slit made in any material by cutting or sawing.
kermes
A small European evergreen oak (Quercus coccifera) on which the kermes insect (Coccus ilicis) feeds.
kersey
A kind of coarse, woolen cloth, usually ribbed, woven from wool of long staple.
kerish
Clownish; boorish.
kerosene
An oil used for illuminating purposes, formerly obtained from the distillation of mineral wax, bituminous shale, etc.
keslop
The stomach of a calf, prepared for rennet.
ketch
An almost obsolete form of vessel, with a mainmast and a mizzenmast, -- usually from one hundred to two hundred and fifty tons burden.
keyway
See Key way, under Key.
keyage
Wharfage; quayage.
kettle
A metallic vessel, with a wide mouth, often without a cover, used for heating and boiling water or other liguids.
ketmie
The name of certain African species of Hibiscus, cultivated for the acid of their mucilage.
ketol
One of a series of series of complex nitrogenous substances, represented by methyl ketol and related to indol.
keuper
The upper division of the European Triassic. See Chart of Geology.
kevel
A strong cleat to which large ropes are belayed.
keyhole
A hole or apertupe in a door or lock, for receiving a key.
keyboard
The whole arrangement, or one range, of the keys of an organ, typewriter, etc.
keyed
Furnished with keys; as, a keyed instrument; also, set to a key, as a tune.
keynote
The fundamental fact or idea; that which gives the key; as, the keynote of a policy or a sermon.
keyseat
To form a key seat, as by cutting. See Key seat, under Key.
kibe
A chap or crack in the flesh occasioned by cold; an ulcerated chilblain.
khedive
A governor or viceroy; -- a title granted in 1867 by the sultan of Turkey to the ruler of Egypt.
khan
A king; a prince; a chief; a governor; -- so called among the Tartars, Turks, and Persians, and in countries now or formerly governed by them.
khaya
A lofty West African tree (Khaya Senegalensis), related to the mahogany, which it resembles in the quality of the wood.
kholah
The Indian jackal.
kibble
To bruise; to grind coarsely; as, kibbled oats.
kick
To strike, thrust, or hit violently with the foot; as, a horse kicks a groom; a man kicks a dog.
kibitka
A tent used by the Kirghiz Tartars.
kiby
Affected with kibes.
kidnap
To take (any one) by force or fear, and against one's will, with intent to carry to another place.
kiddier
A huckster; a cadger.
kiefekil
A species of clay; meerschaum.
knead
Fig.: To treat or form as by kneading; to beat.
kirtle
A garment varying in form and use at different times, and worn doth by men and women.
kinematics
The science which treats of motions considered in themselves, or apart from their causes; the comparison and relation of motions.
kilo
An abbreviation of Kilogram.
kilderkin
A small barrel; an old liquid measure containing eighteen English beer gallons, or nearly twenty-two gallons, United States measure.
kieselguhr
Siliceous earth; specifically, porous infusorial earth, used as an absorbent of nitroglycerin in the manufacture of dynamite.
kike
To gaze; to stare.
kill
To deprive of life, animal or vegetable, in any manner or by any means; to render inanimate; to put to death; to slay.
kiln
A furnace for burning bricks; a brickkiln.
kimnel
A tub. See Kemelin.
kilt
P. p. from Kill.
kimbo
Crooked; arched; bent.
kincob
India silk brocaded with flowers in silver or gold.
kind
Characteristic of the species; belonging to one's nature; natural; native.
kioways
A tribe of Indians distantly related to the Shoshones. They formerly inhabited the region about the head waters of the North Platte.
kino
The dark red dried juice of certain plants, used variously in tanning, in dyeing, and as an astringent in medicine.
king
A playing card having the picture of a king; as, the king of diamonds.
kink
A twist or loop in a rope or thread, caused by a spontaneous doubling or winding upon itself; a close loop or curl; a doubling in a cord.
kinsfolk
Relatives; kindred; kin; persons of the same family or closely or closely related families.
kiosk
A Turkish open summer house or pavilion, supported by pillars.
kipskin
Leather prepared from the skin of young or small cattle, intermediate in grade between calfskin and cowhide.
kipe
An osier basket used for catching fish.
kipper
A salmon after spawning.
kirked
Turned upward; bent.
kirsome
Christian; christened.
kiwikiwi
Any species of Apteryx, esp. A. australis; -- so called in imitation of its notes. Called also kiwi. See Apteryx.
kite
Fig. : One who is rapacious.
kiss
To salute with the lips, as a mark of affection, reverence, submission, forgiveness, etc.
kirumbo
A bird of Madagascar (Leptosomus discolor), the only living type of a family allied to the rollers. It has a pair of loral plumes.
kish
A workman's name for the graphite which forms incidentally in iron smelting.
kist
A chest; hence, a coffin.
kitcat
A game played by striking with a stick small piece of wood, called a cat, shaped like two cones united at their bases; tipcat.
kitling
A young kitten; a whelp.
kith
Acquaintance; kindred.
kitish
Like or relating to a kite.
kittel
See Kittle, v. t.
kive
A mash vat. See Keeve.
knab
To seize with the teeth; to gnaw.
klipdachs
A small mammal (Hyrax Capensis), found in South Africa. It is of about the size of a rabbit, and closely resembles the daman.
kleeneboc
(Zool.) An antelope (Cerphalopus pygmaeus), found in South Africa. It is of very small size, being but one foot high at shoulder.
klicket
A small postern or gate in a palisade, for the passage of sallying parties.
kloof
A glen; a ravine closed at its upper end.
klopemania
See Kleptomania.
knap
A protuberance; a swelling; a knob; a button; hence, rising ground; a summit. See Knob, and Knop.
knack
To crack; to make a sharp, abrupt noise to chink.
knag
A knot in wood; a protuberance.
knave
A boy; especially, a boy servant.
knarl
A knot in wood. See Gnarl.
knawel
A low, spreading weed (Scleranthus annuus), common in sandy soil.
kobold
A kind of domestic spirit in German mythology, corresponding to the Scottish brownie and the English Robin Goodfellow.
knoll
A little round hill; a mound; a small elevation of earth; the top or crown of a hill.
knife
A sword or dagger.
knee
In man, the joint in the middle part of the leg.
knebelite
A mineral of a gray, red, brown, or green color, and glistening luster. It is a silicate of iron and manganese.
kneck
The twisting of a rope or cable, as it is running out.
knell
To sound as a knell; especially, to toll at a death or funeral; hence, to sound as a warning or evil omen.
knicker
A small ball of clay, baked hard and oiled, used as a marble by boys in playing.
knives
Of Knife. See Knife.
knight
A young servant or follower; a military attendant.
knit
To form into a knot, or into knots; to tie together, as cord; to fasten by tying.
knob
A hard protuberance; a hard swelling or rising; a bunch; a lump; as, a knob in the flesh, or on a bone.
knock
To drive or be driven against something; to strike against something; to clash; as, one heavy body knocks against another.
knuckle
The joint of a finger, particularly when made prominent by the closing of the fingers.
knout
To punish with the knout.
knop
A knob; a bud; a bunch; a button.
knot
A fastening together of the pars or ends of one or more threads, cords, ropes, etc., by any one of various ways of tying or entangling.
know
To perceive or apprehend clearly and certainly; to understand; to have full information of; as, to know one's duty.
knubs
Waste silk formed in winding off the threads from a cocoon.
koala
A tailless marsupial (Phascolarctos cinereus), found in Australia. The female carries her young on the back of her neck.
knuff
A lout; a clown.
knurl
A contorted knot in wood; a crossgrained protuberance; a nodule; a boss or projection.
koba
Any one of several species of African antelopes of the genus Kobus, esp. the species Kobus sing-sing.
kobellite
A blackish gray mineral, a sulphide of antimony, bismuth, and lead.
koulan
A wild horse (Equus, / Asinus, onager) inhabiting the plants of Central Asia; -- called also gour, khur, and onager.
komenic
Of or pertaining to, or designating, an acid derived from meconic acid.
koff
A two-masted Dutch vessel.
kodak
A kind of portable camera.
koel
Any one of several species of cuckoos of the genus Eudynamys, found in India, the East Indies, and Australia.
kohl
A mixture of soot and other ingredients, used by Egyptian and other Eastern women to darken the edges of the eyelids.
kolarian
An individual of one of the races of aboriginal inhabitants which survive in Hindostan.
kopeck
A small Russian coin. One hundred kopecks make a rouble, worth about sixty cents.
koodoo
A large South African antelope (Strepsiceros kudu). The males have graceful spiral horns, sometimes four feet long.
kookoom
The oryx or gemsbok.
koran
The Scriptures of the Mohammedans, containing the professed revelations to Mohammed; -- called also Alcoran.
kotow
The prostration made by mandarins and others to their superiors, either as homage or worship, by knocking the forehead on the ground.
krameric
Pertaining to, or derived from, Krameria (rhatany); as, krameric acid, usually called ratanhia-tannic acid.
kowtow
The same as Kotow.
koumiss
An intoxicating fermented or distilled liquor originally made by the Tartars from mare's or camel's milk.
kousso
An Abyssinian rosaceous tree (Brayera anthelmintica), the flowers of which are used as a vermifuge.
kraal
A collection of huts within a stockade; a village; sometimes, a single hut.
kraken
A fabulous Scandinavian sea monster, often represented as resembling an island, but sometimes as resembling an immense octopus.
kreutzer
A small copper coin formerly used in South Germany; also, a small Austrian copper coin.
krang
The carcass of a whale after the blubber has been removed.
krems
A variety of white lead. See Krems lead, under Lead, n.
kritarchy
The rule of the judges over Israel.
kris
A Malay dagger. See Creese.
krone
A coin of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, of the value of about twenty-eight cents. See Crown, n., 9.
rifle
To seize and bear away by force; to snatch away; to carry off.
obovate
Inversely ovate; ovate with the narrow end downward; as, an obovate leaf.
mephitical
Tending to destroy life; poisonous; noxious; as, mephitic exhalations; mephitic regions.
loll
To act lazily or indolently; to recline; to lean; to throw one's self down; to lie at ease.
legless
Not having a leg.
laplander
A native or inhabitant of Lapland; -- called also Lapp.
ladde
Of Lead, to guide.
kythe
To come into view; to appear.
kussier
(Mus.) A Turkish instrument of music, with a hollow body covered with skin, over which five strings are stretched.
kummel
A Russian and German liqueur, consisting of a sweetened spirit flavored with caraway seeds.
kuda
The East Indian tapir. See Tapir.
krumhorn
A reed instrument of music of the cornet kind, now obsolete (see Cornet, 1, a.).
kshatruya
The military caste, the second of the four great Hindoo castes; also, a member of that caste. See Caste.
kudos
Glory; fame; renown; praise.
kukang
The slow lemur. See Lemur.
kurilian
Of or pertaining to the Kurile Islands, a chain of islands in the Pacific ocean, extending from the southern extremity of Kamschatka to Yesso.
kumquat
A small tree of the genus Citrus (C. Japonica) growing in China and Japan; also, its small acid, orange-colored fruit used for preserves.
kurd
A native or inhabitant of a mountainous region of Western Asia belonging to the Turkish and Persian monarchies.
kursaal
A public hall or room, for the use of visitors at watering places and health resorts in Germany.
kusimanse
A carnivorous animal (Crossarchus obscurus) of tropical Africa. It its allied to the civets. Called also kusimansel, and mangue.
kyke
To look steadfastly; to gaze.
kyanize
To render (wood) proof against decay by saturating with a solution of corrosive sublimate in open tanks, or under pressure.
kutauss
The India civet (Viverra zibetha).
kutch
The packet of vellum leaves in which the gold is first beaten into thin sheets.
kyar
Cocoanut fiber, or the cordage made from it. See Coir.
kydde
Imp. of Kythe, to show.
kymric
See Cymric, a. & n.
kyley
A variety of the boomerang.
kyloes
The cattle of the Hebrides, or of the Highlands.
kyrie
See Kyrie eleison.
kithe
To make known; to manifest; to show; to declare.
lace
A snare or gin, especially one made of interwoven cords; a net.
labor
Intellectual exertion; mental effort; as, the labor of compiling a history.
labefy
To weaken or impair.
kytoplasma
See Karyoplasma.
laas
A lace. See Lace.
labial
Of or pertaining to the lips or labia; as, labial veins.
lablab
An East Indian name for several twining leguminous plants related to the bean, but commonly applied to the hyacinth bean (Dolichos Lablab).
labyrinth
Any intricate or involved inclosure; especially, an ornamental maze or inclosure in a park or garden.
labrador
A region of British America on the Atlantic coast, north of Newfoundland.
laburnic
Of, pertaining to, or derived from, the laburnum.
lakh
One hundred thousand; also, a vaguely great number; as, a lac of rupees.
laccic
Pertaining to lac, or produced from it; as, laccic acid.
laconian
Of or pertaining to Laconia, a division of ancient Greece; Spartan.
lachrymary
Containing, or intended to contain, tears; lachrymal.
lache
Neglect; negligence; remissness; neglect to do a thing at the proper time; delay to assert a claim.
lacrymal
See Lachrymatory.
lacing
The act of securing, fastening, or tightening, with a lace or laces.
lack
Blame; cause of blame; fault; crime; offense.
lactage
The produce of animals yielding milk; milk and that which is made from it.
lacquer
To cover with lacquer.
lacrimoso
Plaintive; -- a term applied to a mournful or pathetic movement or style.
lacuna
A small opening; a small pit or depression; a small blank space; a gap or vacancy; a hiatus.
ladanum
A gum resin gathered from certain Oriental species of Cistus. It has a pungent odor and is chiefly used in making plasters, and for fumigation.
lamb
The young of the sheep.
lagomorph
One of the Lagomorpha.
laelaps
A genus of huge, carnivorous, dinosaurian reptiles from the Cretaceous formation of the United States.
ladle
A cuplike spoon, often of large size, with a long handle, used in lading or dipping.
lade
To load; to put a burden or freight on or in; -- generally followed by that which receives the load, as the direct object.
ladied
Ladylike; not rough; gentle.
ladrone
A robber; a pirate; hence, loosely, a rogue or rascal.
lady
A woman who looks after the domestic affairs of a family; a mistress; the female head of a household.
lafayette
The dollar fish.
laemodipod
One of the Laemodipoda.
laevigate
Having a smooth surface, as if polished.
lagena
The terminal part of the cochlea in birds and most reptiles; an appendage of the sacculus, corresponding to the cochlea, in fishes and amphibians.
laggard
Slow; sluggish; backward.
laity
The people, as distinguished from the clergy; the body of the people not in orders.
laical
Of or pertaining to a layman or the laity.
lagemorpha
A group of rodents, including the hares. They have four incisors in the upper jaw. Called also Duplicidentata.
lagoon
A shallow sound, channel, pond, or lake, especially one into which the sea flows; as, the lagoons of Venice.
laidly
Ugly; loathsome.
lair
A place in which to lie or rest; especially, the bed or couch of a wild beast.
lallation
An imperfect enunciation of the letter r, in which it sounds like l.
lake
A pigment formed by combining some coloring matter, usually by precipitation, with a metallic oxide or earth, esp.
laky
Pertaining to a lake.
lalo
The powdered leaves of the baobab tree, used by the Africans to mix in their soup, as the southern negroes use powdered sassafras.
lama
In Thibet, Mongolia, etc., a priest or monk of the belief called Lamaism.
lanolin
A peculiar fatlike body, made up of cholesterin and certain fatty acids, found in feathers, hair, wool, and keratin tissues generally.
lance
A soldier armed with a lance; a lancer.
lammas
The first day of August; -- called also Lammas day, and Lammastide.
lame
Moving with pain or difficulty on account of injury, defect, or temporary obstruction of a function; as, a lame leg, arm, or muscle.
lamia
A monster capable of assuming a woman's form, who was said to devour human beings or suck their blood; a vampire; a sorceress; a witch.
lamp
A thin plate or lamina.
lanarkite
A mineral consisting of sulphate of lead, occurring either massive or in long slender prisms, of a greenish white or gray color.
laniary
Lacerating or tearing; as, the laniary canine teeth.
land
Urine. See Lant.
langate
A linen roller used in dressing wounds.
lank
Slender and thin; not well filled out; not plump; shrunken; lean.
lanneret
A long-tailed falcon (Falco lanarius), of Southern Europe, Asia, and Northern Africa, resembling the American prairie falcon.
laodicean
Of or pertaining to Laodicea, a city in Phrygia Major; like the Christians of Laodicea; lukewarm in religion.
lanuginous
Covered with down, or fine soft hair; downy.
lanseh
The small, whitish brown fruit of an East Indian tree (Lansium domesticum). It has a fleshy pulp, with an agreeable subacid taste.
lant
Any one of several species of small, slender, marine fishes of the genus Ammedytes. The common European species (A.
lanyard
A short piece of rope or line for fastening something in ships; as, the lanyards of the gun ports, of the buoy, and the like; esp.
laocoon
A priest of Apollo, during the Trojan war. (See 2.)
lapdog
A small dog fondled in the lap.
laparocele
A rupture or hernia in the lumbar regions.
lapboard
A board used on the lap as a substitute for a table, as by tailors.
lapful
As much as the lap can contain.
lapel
That part of a garment which is turned back; specifically, the lap, or fold, of the front of a coat in continuation of collar.
lapidarian
Of or pertaining to stone; inscribed on stone; as, a lapidarian record.
lawyer
The black-necked stilt. See Stilt.
latch
To smear; to anoint.
lark
A frolic; a jolly time.
larboard
The left-hand side of a ship to one on board facing toward the bow; port; -- opposed to starboard.
laputan
Of or pertaining to Laputa, an imaginary flying island described in Gulliver's Travels as the home of chimerical philosophers.
lappaceous
Resembling the capitulum of burdock; covered with forked points.
lapse
A slip; an error; a fault; a failing in duty; a slight deviation from truth or rectitude.
lapwork
Work in which one part laps over another.
laqueary
Using a noose, as a gladiator.
lare
Pasture; feed. See Lair.
larcenist
One who commits larceny.
lard
Bacon; the flesh of swine.
large
Abundant; ample; as, a large supply of provisions.
lariat
A long, slender rope made of hemp or strips of hide, esp. one with a noose; -- used as a lasso for catching cattle, horses, etc.
lascar
A native sailor, employed in European vessels; also, a menial employed about arsenals, camps, camps, etc.
larum
See Alarum, and Alarm.
laroid
Like or belonging to the Gull family (Laridae).
larrup
To beat or flog soundly.
larva
The early, immature form of any animal when more or less of a metamorphosis takes place, before the assumption of the mature shape.
lary
A guillemot; -- called also lavy.
lass
A youth woman; a girl; a sweetheart.
lash
The thong or braided cord of a whip, with which the blow is given.
lask
A diarrhea or flux.
last
Of Last, to endure, contracted from lasteth.
latakia
A superior quality of Turkish smoking tobacco, so called from the place where produced, the ancient Laodicea.
lavish
Expending or bestowing profusely; profuse; prodigal; as, lavish of money; lavish of praise.
laud
High commendation; praise; honor; exaltation; glory.
latian
Belonging, or relating, to Latium, a country of ancient Italy. See Latin.
late
Coming after the time when due, or after the usual or proper time; not early; slow; tardy; long delayed; as, a late spring.
lath
To cover or line with laths.
latrate
To bark as a dog.
latten
A kind of brass hammered into thin sheets, formerly much used for making church utensils, as candlesticks, crosses, etc.
laura
A number of hermitages or cells in the same neighborhood occupied by anchorites who were under the same superior.
laugh
Fig.: To be or appear gay, cheerful, pleasant, mirthful, lively, or brilliant; to sparkle; to sport.
launce
See Lant, the fish.
lava
The melted rock ejected by a volcano from its top or fissured sides. It flows out in streams sometimes miles in length.
lave
To wash; to bathe; as, to lave a bruise.
lawing
Going to law; litigation.
lawe
To cut off the claws and balls of, as of a dog's fore feet.
lavolta
An old dance, for two persons, being a kind of waltz, in which the woman made a high spring or bound.
lawbreaker
One who disobeys the law; a criminal.
lawful
Conformable to law; allowed by law; legitimate; competent.
lawgiver
One who makes or enacts a law or system of laws; a legislator.
lammaking
Enacting laws; legislative.
lawless
Contrary to, or unauthorized by, law; illegal; as, a lawless claim.
lawmaker
A legislator; a lawgiver.
lawn
An open space between woods.
lawmonger
A trader in law; one who practices law as if it were a trade.
lawsonia
An Asiatic and North African shrub (Lawsonia inermis), with smooth oval leaves, and fragrant white flowers.
leap
A weel or wicker trap for fish.
lazily
In a lazy manner.
laying
The act of one who, or that which, lays.
laxly
In a lax manner.
laxation
The act of loosening or slackening, or the state of being loosened or slackened.
laxity
The state or quality of being lax; want of tenseness, strictness, or exactness.
laxness
The state of being lax; laxity.
layer
One who, or that which, lays.
layship
The condition of being a layman.
layland
Land lying untilled; fallow ground.
layman
A lay figure. See under Lay, n. (above).
lazar
A person infected with a filthy or pestilential disease; a leper.
laze
To be lazy or idle.
leaf
To shoot out leaves; to produce leaves; to leave; as, the trees leaf in May.
lazzaroni
The homeless idlers of Naples who live by chance work or begging; -- so called from the Hospital of St.
lazulite
A mineral of a light indigo-blue color, occurring in small masses, or in monoclinic crystals; blue spar.
lazy
Disinclined to action or exertion; averse to labor; idle; shirking work.
leach
A quantity of wood ashes, through which water passes, and thus imbibes the alkali.
lead
One of the elements, a heavy, pliable, inelastic metal, having a bright, bluish color, but easily tarnished.
leal
Faithful; loyal; true.
league
A measure of length or distance, varying in different countries from about 2.4 to 4.6 English statute miles of 5.
leak
The entrance or escape of a fluid through a crack, fissure, or other aperture; as, the leak gained on the ship's pumps.
leam
A cord or strap for leading a dog.
lean
To incline in opinion or desire; to conform in conduct; -- with to, toward, etc.
leeboard
A board, or frame of planks, lowered over the side of a vessel to lessen her leeway when closehauled, by giving her greater draught.
lecanoric
Pertaining to, or designating, an organic acid which is obtained from several varieties of lichen (Lecanora, Roccella, etc.
leat
An artificial water trench, esp. one to or from a mill.
lear
To learn. See Lere, to learn.
leasable
Such as can be leased.
leave
To send out leaves; to leaf; -- often with out.
lebban
Coagulated sour milk diluted with water; -- a common beverage among the Arabs. Also, a fermented liquor made of the same.
lecythis
A genus of gigantic trees, chiefly Brazilian, of the order Myrtaceae, having woody capsules opening by an apical lid.
leche
See water buck, under 3d Buck.
lectica
A kind of litter or portable couch.
ledden
Language; speech; voice; cry.
ledge
A shelf, ridge, or reef, of rocks.
leet
Of Let, to allow.
leek
A plant of the genus Allium (A. Porrum), having broadly linear succulent leaves rising from a loose oblong cylindrical bulb.
leech
See Leach, v. t.
leede
A caldron; a copper kettle.
leer
Empty; destitute; wanting
lees
Dregs. See 2d Lee.
legacy
A gift of property by will, esp. of money or personal property; a bequest. Also Fig.; as, a legacy of dishonor or disease.
leeward
Pertaining to, or in the direction of, the part or side toward which the wind blows; -- opposed to windward; as, a leeward berth; a leeward ship.
left
That part of surrounding space toward which the left side of one's body is turned; as, the house is on the left when you face North.
legge
To lighten; to allay.
lege
To allege; to assert.
legibility
The quality of being legible; legibleness.
limoges
A city of Southern France.
lherzolite
An igneous rock consisting largely of chrysolite, with pyroxene and picotite (a variety of spinel containing chromium).
lepid
Pleasant; jocose.
lemon
The tree which bears lemons; the lemon tree.
leisurable
Vacant of employment; not occupied; idle; leisure; as leisurable hours.
leiotrichi
The division of mankind which embraces the smooth-haired races.
leguleian
Lawyerlike; legal.
leiger
See Leger, n., 2.
leipoa
A genus of Australian gallinaceous birds including but a single species (Leipoa ocellata), about the size of a turkey.
lister
A spear armed with three or more prongs, for striking fish.
leme
A ray or glimmer of light; a gleam.
leitmotif
See Leading motive, under Leading, a.
leman
A sweetheart, of either sex; a gallant, or a mistress; -- usually in a bad sense.
lemming
Any one of several species of small arctic rodents of the genera Myodes and Cuniculus, resembling the meadow mice in form.
lemnian
Of or pertaining to the isle of Lemnos.
leno
A light open cotton fabric used for window curtains.
lene
To lend; to grant; to permit.
lemur
One of a family (Lemuridae) of nocturnal mammals allied to the monkeys, but of small size, and having a sharp and foxlike muzzle, and large eyes.
lend
To allow the custody and use of, on condition of the return of the same; to grant the temporary use of; as, to lend a book; -- opposed to borrow.
lengest
Longer; longest; -- obsolete compar. and superl. of long.
leniency
The quality or state of being lenient; lenity; clemency.
leonese
Of or pertaining to Leon, in Spain.
lent
Imp. & p. p. of Lend.
leod
People; a nation; a man.
lepadoid
A stalked barnacle of the genus Lepas, or family Lepadidae; a goose barnacle. Also used adjectively.
leper
A person affected with leprosy.
lete
To let; to leave.
lerot
A small European rodent (Eliomys nitela), allied to the dormouse.
leptiform
Having a form somewhat like leptus; -- said of active insect larvae having three pairs of legs. See Larva.
leporine
Of or pertaining to a hare; like or characteristic of, a hare.
leprose
Covered with thin, scurfy scales.
lere
Learning; lesson; lore.
lernaea
A Linnaean genus of parasitic Entomostraca, -- the same as the family Lernaeidae.
less
Not so much; in a smaller or lower degree; as, less bright or loud; less beautiful.
lesbian
Of or pertaining to the island anciently called Lesbos, now Mitylene, in the Grecian Archipelago.
lesion
A hurt; an injury.
lest
Lust; desire; pleasure.
letch
Strong desire; passion. (Archaic).
leviable
Fit to be levied; capable of being assessed and collected; as, sums leviable by course of law.
leuchaemia
See Leucocythaemia.
lethal
One of the higher alcohols of the paraffine series obtained from spermaceti as a white crystalline solid.
lette
To let; to hinder. See Let, to hinder.
levana
A goddess who protected newborn infants.
leve
To grant; -- used esp. in exclamations or prayers followed by a dependent clause.
levy
The act of levying or collecting by authority; as, the levy of troops, taxes, etc.
levogyrate
Turning or twisting the plane of polarization towards the left, as levulose, levotartaric acid, etc.
levulosan
An unfermentable carbohydrate obtained by gently heating levulose.
lewisson
An iron dovetailed tenon, made in sections, which can be fitted into a dovetail mortise; -- used in hoisting large stones, etc.
lewd
Not clerical; laic; laical; hence, unlearned; simple.
lexical
Of or pertaining to a lexicon, to lexicography, or words; according or conforming to a lexicon.
lien
Of Lie. See Lain.
libyan
Of or pertaining to Libya, the ancient name of that part of Africa between Egypt and the Atlantic Ocean, or of Africa as a whole.
liassic
Of the age of the Lias; pertaining to the Lias formation.
liaison
A union, or bond of union; an intimacy; especially, an illicit intimacy between a man and a woman.
liability
The state of being liable; as, the liability of an insurer; liability to accidents; liability to the law.
liage
Union by league; alliance.
liana
A luxuriant woody plant, climbing high trees and having ropelike stems. The grapevine often has the habit of a liane.
liar
A person who knowingly utters falsehood; one who lies.
libidinist
One given to lewdness.
libant
Sipping; touching lightly.
libel
A brief writing of any kind, esp. a declaration, bill, certificate, request, supplication, etc.
libkin
A house or lodging.
libra
The Balance; the seventh sign in the zodiac, which the sun enters at the autumnal equinox in September, marked thus / in almanacs, etc.
lidded
Covered with a lid.
licitation
The act of offering for sale to the highest bidder.
licensable
That can be licensed.
lich
A dead body; a corpse.
lick
To draw or pass the tongue over; as, a dog licks his master's hand.
licorice
A plant of the genus Glycyrrhiza (G. glabra), the root of which abounds with a sweet juice, and is much used in demulcent compositions.
lied
A lay; a German song. It differs from the French chanson, and the Italian canzone, all three being national.
lidless
Having no lid, or not covered with the lids, as the eyes; hence, sleepless; watchful.
lieberkuhn
A concave metallic mirror attached to the object-glass end of a microscope, to throw down light on opaque objects; a reflector.
lief
Pleasing; agreeable; acceptable; preferable.
liege
Sovereign; independent; having authority or right to allegiance; as, a liege lord.
likable
Such as can be liked; such as to attract liking; as, a likable person.
lige
To lie; to tell lies.
life
A certain way or manner of living with respect to conditions, circumstances, character, conduct, occupation, etc.
lier
One who lies down; one who rests or remains, as in concealment.
lieu
Place; room; stead; -- used only in the phrase in lieu of, that is, instead of.
lift
The sky; the atmosphere; the firmament.
ligament
Anything that ties or unites one thing or part to another; a bandage; a bond.
ligneous
Made of wood; consisting of wood; of the nature of, or resembling, wood; woody.
ligge
To lie or recline.
light
That agent, force, or action in nature by the operation of which upon the organs of sight, objects are rendered visible or luminous.
ligroin
A trade name applied somewhat indefinitely to some of the volatile products obtained in refining crude petroleum.
ligula
The central process, or front edge, of the labium of insects. It sometimes serves as a tongue or proboscis, as in bees.
lily
That end of a compass needle which should point to the north; -- so called as often ornamented with the figure of a lily or fleur-de-lis.
lilac
A shrub of the genus Syringa. There are six species, natives of Europe and Asia.  Syringa vulgaris, the common lilac, and S.
like
Equal, or nearly equal; as, fields of like extent.
liking
Looking; appearing; as, better or worse liking. See Like, to look.
liliaceous
Of or pertaining to a natural order of which the lily, tulip, and hyacinth are well-known examples.
lilt
To do anything with animation and quickness, as to skip, fly, or hop.
lime
A thong by which a dog is led; a leash.
lima
The capital city of Peru, in South America.
limb
A part of a tree which extends from the trunk and separates into branches and twigs; a large branch.
limmer
A limehound; a leamer.
limicolae
A group of shore birds, embracing the plovers, sandpipers, snipe, curlew, etc. ; the Grallae.
limn
To draw or paint; especially, to represent in an artistic way with pencil or brush.
lixivial
Impregnated with, or consisting of, alkaline salts extracted from wood ashes; impregnated with a salt or salts like a lixivium.
lirella
A linear apothecium furrowed along the middle; the fruit of certain lichens.
linnean
Of or pertaining to Linnaeus, the celebrated Swedish botanist.
linch
A ledge; a right-angled projection.
limu
The Hawaiian name for seaweeds. Over sixty kinds are used as food, and have species names, as Limu Lipoa, Limu palawai, etc.
limp
To halt; to walk lamely. Also used figuratively.
limsy
Limp; flexible; flimsy.
limy
Smeared with, or consisting of, lime; viscous.
linament
Lint; esp., lint made into a tent for insertion into wounds or ulcers.
ling
A large, marine, gadoid fish (Molva vulgaris) of Northern Europe and Greenland. It is valued as a food fish and is largely salted and dried.
lind
The linden. See Linden.
line
The longer and finer fiber of flax.
linigerous
Bearing flax; producing linen.
link
A torch made of tow and pitch, or the like.
lipaemia
A condition in which fat occurs in the blood.
lintel
A horizontal member spanning an opening, and carrying the superincumbent weight by means of its strength in resisting crosswise fracture.
linoleate
A salt of linoleic acid.
linsang
Any viverrine mammal of the genus Prionodon, inhabiting the East Indies and Southern Asia. The common East Indian linsang (P.
linum
A genus of herbaceous plants including the flax (Linum usitatissimum).
lion
A sign and a constellation; Leo.
lipyl
A hypothetical radical of glycerin.
lipochrin
A yellow coloring matter, soluble in ether, contained in the small round fat drops in the retinal epithelium cells.
lipped
Having a lip or lips; having a raised or rounded edge resembling the lip; -- often used in composition; as, thick-lipped, thin-lipped, etc.
liquable
Capable of being melted.
lira
An Italian coin equivalent in value to the French franc.
litigable
Such as can be litigated.
lisp
To pronounce the sibilant letter s imperfectly; to give s and z the sound of th; -- a defect common among children.
lisbon
A sweet, light-colored species of wine, produced in the province of Estremadura, and so called as being shipped from Lisbon, in Portugal.
liripoop
A pendent part of the old clerical tippet; afterwards, a tippet; a scarf; -- worn also by doctors, learned men, etc.
liroconite
A hydrated arseniate of copper, occurring in obtuse pyramidal crystals of a sky-blue or verdigris-green color.
lisle
A city of France celebrated for certain manufactures.
lisne
A cavity or hollow.
litre
A measure of capacity in the metric system, being a cubic decimeter, equal to 61.022 cubic inches, or 2.
liss
Release; remission; ease; relief.
list
To inclose for combat; as, to list a field.
literacy
State of being literate.
lith
3d pers. sing. pres. of Lie, to recline, for lieth.
live
To make one's abiding place or home; to abide; to dwell; to reside.
litate
Forked, with the points slightly curved outward.
litraneter
An instrument for ascertaining the specific gravity of liquids.
litter
A bed or stretcher so arranged that a person, esp. a sick or wounded person, may be easily carried in or upon it.
lituiform
Having the form of a lituus; like a lituite.
livable
Such as can be lived.
living
The state of one who, or that which, lives; lives; life; existence.
livid
Black and blue; grayish blue; of a lead color; discolored, as flesh by contusion.
laving
Being alive; having life; as, a living creature.
livinian
A native or an inhabitant of Livonia; the language (allied to the Finnish) of the Livonians.
livonian
Of or pertaining to Livonia, a district of Russia near the Baltic Sea.
livraison
A part of a book or literary composition printed and delivered by itself; a number; a part.
loco
A direction in written or printed music to return to the proper pitch after having played an octave higher.
lobbish
Like a lob; consisting of lobs.
lodemanage
Pilotage; skill of a pilot or loadsman.
llama
A South American ruminant (Auchenia llama), allied to the camels, but much smaller and without a hump.
lixt
2d pers. sing. pres. of Lige, to lie, to tell lies, -- contracted for ligest.
liza
The American white mullet (Mugil curema).
llanero
One of the inhabitants of the llanos of South America.
load
A burden; that which is laid on or put in anything for conveyance; that which is borne or sustained; a weight; as, a heavy load.
loan
The act of lending; a lending; permission to use; as, the loan of a book, money, services.
loaf
Any thick lump, mass, or cake; especially, a large regularly shaped or molded mass, as of bread, sugar, or cake.
loam
A kind of soil; an earthy mixture of clay and sand, with organic matter to which its fertility is chiefly due.
loath
Hateful; odious; disliked.
lobar
Of or pertaining to a lobe; characterized by, or like, a lobe or lobes.
lobscouse
A combination of meat with vegetables, bread, etc., usually stewed, sometimes baked; an olio.
lobiped
Having lobate toes, as a coot.
lobcock
A dull, sluggish person; a lubber; a lob.
lobe
Any projection or division, especially one of a somewhat rounded form
loblolly
Gruel; porridge; -- so called among seamen.
lobosa
An order of Rhizopoda, in which the pseudopodia are thick and irregular in form, as in the Amoeba.
locellate
Divided into secondary compartments or cells, as where one cavity is separated into several smaller ones.
lobular
Like a lobule; pertaining to a lobule or lobules.
local
Of or pertaining to a particular place, or to a definite region or portion of space; restricted to one place or region; as, a local custom.
loch
A lake; a bay or arm of the sea.
lock
A tuft of hair; a flock or small quantity of wool, hay, or other like substance; a tress or ringlet of hair.
logman
A man who carries logs.
loft
That which is lifted up; an elevation.
lodge
A shelter in which one may rest; as: (a) A shed; a rude cabin; a hut; as, an Indian's lodge.
loculament
The cell of a pericarp in which the seed is lodged.
lode
A water course or way; a reach of water.
lodicule
One of the two or three delicate membranous scales which are next to the stamens in grasses.
loess
A quaternary deposit, usually consisting of a fine yellowish earth, on the banks of the Rhine and other large rivers.
loge
A lodge; a habitation.
logan
A rocking or balanced stone.
logcock
The pileated woodpecker.
loggat
A small log or piece of wood.
logic
A treatise on logic; as, Mill's Logic.
loin
That part of a human being or quadruped, which extends on either side of the spinal column between the hip bone and the false ribs.
logy
Heavy or dull in respect to motion or thought; as, a logy horse.
logogram
A word letter; a phonogram, that, for the sake of brevity, represents a word; as, |, i. e., t, for it.
logroll
To engage in logrolling; to accomplish by logrolling.
lohock
See Loch, a medicine.
loimic
Of or pertaining to the plague or contagious disorders.
loki
The evil deity, the author of all calamities and mischief, answering to the African of the Persians.
loir
A large European dormouse (Myoxus glis).
loiter
To be slow in moving; to delay; to linger; to be dilatory; to spend time idly; to saunter; to lag behind.
loke
A private path or road; also, the wicket or hatch of a door.
locao
A green vegetable dye imported from China.
loligo
A genus of cephalopods, including numerous species of squids, common on the coasts of America and Europe.
maigre
Belonging to a fast day or fast; as, a maigre day.
lunular
Having a form like that of the new moon; shaped like a crescent.
louse
Any one of numerous small mandibulate insects, mostly parasitic on birds, and feeding on the feathers.
lore
The space between the eye and bill, in birds, and the corresponding region in reptiles and fishes.
loon
A sorry fellow; a worthless person; a rogue.
long
Slow in passing; causing weariness by length or duration; lingering; as, long hours of watching.
loment
An elongated pod, consisting, like the legume, of two valves, but divided transversely into small cells, each containing a single seed.
loma
A lobe; a membranous fringe or flap.
lombard
Of or pertaining to Lombardy, or the inhabitants of Lombardy.
london
The capital city of England.
lone
A lane. See Loanin.
look
To direct the attention (to something); to consider; to examine; as, to look at an action.
loob
The clay or slimes washed from tin ore in dressing.
loof
The spongelike fibers of the fruit of a cucurbitaceous plant (Luffa Aegyptiaca); called also vegetable sponge.
lool
A vessel used to receive the washings of ores of metals.
loom
See Loon, the bird.
lophine
A nitrogenous organic base obtained by the oxidation of amarine, and regarded as a derivative of benzoic aldehyde.
loos
Praise; fame; reputation.
loop
A mass of iron in a pasty condition gathered into a ball for the tilt hammer or rolls.
loord
A dull, stupid fellow; a drone.
loot
The act of plundering.
lope
To leap; to dance.
loquacious
Given to continual talking; talkative; garrulous.
loppard
A tree, the top of which has been lopped off.
lopseed
A perennial herb (Phryma Leptostachya), having slender seedlike fruits.
lorcha
A kind of light vessel used on the coast of China, having the hull built on a European model, and the rigging like that of a Chinese junk.
lord
A hump-backed person; -- so called sportively.
lothsome
See Loath, Loathly, etc.
losable
Such as can be lost.
lorgnette
Elaborate double eyeglasses.
loral
Of or pertaining to the lore; -- said of certain feathers of birds, scales of reptiles, etc.
lorel
A good for nothing fellow; a vagabond.
lorica
A cuirass, originally of leather, afterward of plates of metal or horn sewed on linen or the like.
lorn
Lost; undone; ruined.
loss
The act of losing; failure; destruction; privation; as, the loss of property; loss of money by gaming; loss of health or reputation.
lose
To part with unintentionally or unwillingly, as by accident, misfortune, negligence, penalty, forfeit, etc.
losing
Given to flattery or deceit; flattering; cozening.
lost
Parted with unwillingly or unintentionally; not to be found; missing; as, a lost book or sheep.
lote
A large tree (Celtis australis), found in the south of Europe. It has a hard wood, and bears a cherrylike fruit.
loud
Having, making, or being a strong or great sound; noisy; striking the ear with great force; as, a loud cry; loud thunder.
lottery
Allotment; thing allotted.
lotion
A washing, especially of the skin for the purpose of rendering it fair.
lotong
An East Indian monkey (Semnopithecus femoralis).
lotus
The lote, or nettle tree. See Lote.
louchettes
Goggles intended to rectify strabismus by permitting vision only directly in front.
lounge
To spend time lazily, whether lolling or idly sauntering; to pass time indolently; to stand, sit, or recline, in an indolent manner.
lough
A loch or lake; -- so spelt in Ireland.
louk
An accomplice; a "pal."
loups
The Pawnees, a tribe of North American Indians whose principal totem was the wolf.
lour
An Asiatic sardine (Clupea Neohowii), valued for its oil.
luctation
Effort to overcome in contest; struggle; endeavor.
lowry
An open box car used on railroads. Compare Lorry.
lowbell
A bell used in fowling at night, to frighten birds, and, with a sudden light, to make them fly into a net.
lovable
Having qualities that excite, or are fitted to excite, love; worthy of love.
lout
To bend; to box; to stoop.
louvre
A small lantern. See Lantern, 2 (a).
love
Especially, devoted attachment to, or tender or passionate affection for, one of the opposite sex.
loving
Expressing love or kindness; as, loving words.
lowing
The calling sound made by cows and other bovine animals.
lower
Compar. of Low, a.
lowh
Strong imp. of Laugh.
lowland
Land which is low with respect to the neighboring country; a low or level country; -- opposed to highland.
lowness
The state or quality of being low.
lucarne
A dormer window.
lozenge
A diamond-shaped figure usually with the upper and lower angles slightly acute, borne upon a shield or escutcheon.
loxodromic
Pertaining to sailing on rhumb lines; as, loxodromic tables.
loyally
In a loyal manner; faithfully.
lubber
A heavy, clumsy, or awkward fellow; a sturdy drone; a clown.
lubrical
Having a smooth surface; slippery.
lucid
Shining; bright; resplendent; as, the lucid orbs of heaven.
lucchese
A native or inhabitant of Lucca, in Tuscany; in the plural, the people of Lucca.
luce
A pike when full grown.
luckily
In a lucky manner; by good fortune; fortunately; -- used in a good sense; as, they luckily escaped injury.
lucrative
Yielding lucre; gainful; profitable; making increase of money or goods; as, a lucrative business or office.
lull
To cause to rest by soothing influences; to compose; to calm; to soothe; to quiet.
luff
The side of a ship toward the wind.
ludlamite
A mineral occurring in small, green, transparent, monoclinic crystals. It is a hydrous phosphate of iron.
lucubrate
To study by candlelight or a lamp; to study by night.
ludibrious
Sportive; ridiculous; wanton.
ludwigite
A borate of iron and magnesia, occurring in fibrous masses of a blackish green color.
lues
Disease, especially of a contagious kind.
lugsail
A square sail bent upon a yard that hangs obliquely to the mast and is raised or lowered with the sail.
luggage
That which is lugged; anything cumbrous and heavy to be carried; especially, a traveler's trunks, baggage, etc.
lugmark
A mark cut into the ear of an animal to identify it; an earmark.
lugubrious
Mournful; indicating sorrow, often ridiculously or feignedly; doleful; woful; pitiable; as, a whining tone and a lugubrious look.
luke
Moderately warm; not hot; tepid.
lump
A small mass of matter of irregular shape; an irregular or shapeless mass; as, a lump of coal; a lump of iron ore.
lumbago
A rheumatic pain in the loins and the small of the back.
lullaby
A song to quiet babes or lull them to sleep; that which quiets.
luller
One who, or that which, lulls.
luminary
Any body that gives light, especially one of the heavenly bodies.
lummox
A fat, ungainly, stupid person; an awkward bungler.
lune
Anything in the shape of a half moon.
lunacy
A morbid suspension of good sense or judgment, as through fanaticism.
lunch
A luncheon; specifically, a light repast between breakfast and dinner.
luniform
Resembling the moon in shape.
lung
An organ for aerial respiration; -- commonly in the plural.
lunt
The match cord formerly used in firing cannon.
maasha
An East Indian coin, of about one tenth of the weight of a rupee.
luxate
To displace, or remove from its proper place, as a joint; to put out of joint; to dislocate.
lusern
A lynx. See 1st Lucern and Loup-cervier.
lurdan
Stupid; blockish.
lupine
A leguminous plant of the genus Lupinus, especially L. albus, the seeds of which have been used for food from ancient times.
luny
Crazy; mentally unsound.
lupercal
Of or pertaining to the Lupercalia.
lupulin
A bitter principle extracted from hops.
lurcation
Gluttony; gormandizing.
lurk
To lie hid; to lie in wait.
lure
A contrivance somewhat resembling a bird, and often baited with raw meat; -- used by falconers in recalling hawks.
lurid
Pale yellow; ghastly pale; wan; gloomy; dismal.
lurry
A confused heap; a throng, as of persons; a jumble, as of sounds.
luscious
Sweet; delicious; very grateful to the taste; toothsome; excessively sweet or rich.
lutanist
A person that plays on the lute.
lusk
A lazy fellow; a lubber.
lush
Full of juice or succulence.
lusitanian
Pertaining to Lusitania, the ancient name of the region almost coinciding with Portugal.
lusory
Used in play; sportive; playful.
lust
Inclination; desire.
luting
See Lute, a cement.
lute
A packing ring, as of rubber, for fruit jars, etc.
luth
The leatherback.
lutose
Covered with clay; miry.
lutulence
The state or quality of being lutulent.
lymph
A spring of water; hence, water, or a pure, transparent liquid like water.
lycopod
A plant of the genus Lycopodium.
lyceum
A place of exercise with covered walks, in the suburbs of Athens, where Aristotle taught philosophy.
luxive
Given to luxury; voluptuous.
luxuriance
The state or quality of being luxuriant; rank, vigorous growth; excessive abundance produced by rank growth.
lychnobite
One who labors at night and sleeps in the day.
lycine
A weak base identical with betaine; -- so called because found in the boxthorn (Lycium barbarum). See Betaine.
lying
Of Lie, to tell a falsehood.
lydine
A violet dye derived from aniline.
lygodium
A genus of ferns with twining or climbing fronds, bearing stalked and variously-lobed divisions in pairs.
lyken
To please; -- chiefly used impersonally.
lymhound
A dog held in a leam; a bloodhound; a limehound.
lyre
A stringed instrument of music; a kind of harp much used by the ancients, as an accompaniment to poetry.
lyonnaise
Applied to boiled potatoes cut into small pieces and heated in oil or butter. They are usually flavored with onion and parsley.
lyncean
Of or pertaining to the lynx.
lynx
One of the northern constellations.
lyopomata
An order of brachiopods, in which the valves of shell are not articulated by a hinge. It includes the Lingula, Discina, and allied forms.
lyra
A northern constellation, the Harp, containing a white star of the first magnitude, called Alpha Lyrae, or Vega.
lyterian
Terminating a disease; indicating the end of a disease.
lyrical
Of or pertaining to a lyre or harp.
lysimeter
An instrument for measuring the water that percolates through a certain depth of soil.
lytta
A fibrous and muscular band lying within the longitudinal axis of the tongue in many mammals, as the dog.
lythe
The European pollack; -- called also laith, and leet.
maalin
The sparrow hawk.
madonna
My lady; -- a term of address in Italian formerly used as the equivalent of Madame, but for which Signora is now substituted.
macula
A spot, as on the skin, or on the surface of the sun or of some other luminous orb.
mace
A money of account in China equal to one tenth of a tael; also, a weight of 57.98 grains.
mabolo
A kind of persimmon tree (Diospyros discolor) from the Philippine Islands, now introduced into the East and West Indies.
maat
Dejected; sorrowful; downcast.
mabby
A spirituous liquor or drink distilled from potatoes; -- used in the Barbadoes.
macaco
Any one of several species of lemurs, as the ruffed lemur (Lemur macaco), and the ring-tailed lemur (L.
maccabean
Of or pertaining to Judas Maccabeus or to the Maccabees; as, the Maccabean princes; Maccabean times.
macle
Chiastolite; -- so called from the tessellated appearance of a cross section. See Chiastolite.
machinal
Of or pertaining to machines.
mackerel
A pimp; also, a bawd.
macrocosm
The great world; that part of the universe which is exterior to man; -- contrasted with microcosm, or man.
mactation
The act of killing a victim for sacrifice.
madhouse
A house where insane persons are confined; an insane asylum; a bedlam.
madcap
Inclined to wild sports; delighting in rash, absurd, or dangerous amusements.
madame
My lady; -- a French title formerly given to ladies of quality; now, in France, given to all married women.
madbrain
Hot-headed; rash.
madden
To make mad; to drive to madness; to craze; to excite violently with passion; to make very angry; to enrage.
made
Imp. & p. p. of Make.
madly
In a mad manner; without reason or understanding; wildly.
madia
A genus of composite plants, of which one species (Madia sativa) is cultivated for the oil yielded from its seeds by pressure.
madjoun
An intoxicating confection from the hemp plant; -- used by the Turks and Hindoos.
madman
A man who is mad; lunatic; a crazy person.
madnep
The masterwort (Peucedanum Ostruthium).
magma
Any crude mixture of mineral or organic matters in the state of a thin paste.
magazine
A receptacle in which anything is stored, especially military stores, as ammunition, arms, provisions, etc.
maelstrom
A celebrated whirlpool on the coast of Norway.
madrague
A large fish pound used for the capture of the tunny in the Mediterranean; also applied to the seines used for the same purpose.
magbote
Compensation for the injury done by slaying a kinsman.
maenad
A Bacchante; a priestess or votary of Bacchus.
maestoso
Majestic or majestically; -- a direction to perform a passage or piece of music in a dignified manner.
magged
Worn; fretted; as, a magged brace.
magdala
Designating an orange-red dyestuff obtained from naphthylamine, and called magdala red, naphthalene red, etc.
magellanic
Of or pertaining to, or named from, Magellan, the navigator.
maghet
A name for daisies and camomiles of several kinds.
magi
A caste of priests, philosophers, and magicians, among the ancient Persians; hence, any holy men or sages of the East.
maha
A kind of baboon; the wanderoo.
magpie
Any one of numerous species of the genus Pica and related genera, allied to the jays, but having a long graduated tail.
magnality
A great act or event; a great attainment.
magot
The Barbary ape.
maguari
A South American stork (Euxenara maguari), having a forked tail.
magyar
One of the dominant people of Hungary, allied to the Finns; a Hungarian.
mahrati
The language of the Mahrattas; the language spoken in the Deccan and Concan.
mahdi
Among Mohammedans, the last imam or leader of the faithful. The Sunni, the largest sect of the Mohammedans, believe that he is yet to appear.
mahogany
A large tree of the genus Swietenia (S. Mahogoni), found in tropical America.
maid
An unmarried woman; usually, a young unmarried woman; esp., a girl; a virgin; a maiden.
maia
A genus of spider crabs, including the common European species (Maia squinado).
maieutical
Serving to assist childbirth.
matfelon
The knapweed (Centaurea nigra).
manofwar
A government vessel employed for the purposes of war, esp. one of large size; a ship of war.
malodor
An Offensive to the sense of smell; ill-smelling.
makable
Capable of being made.
maioid
Of or pertaining to the genus Maia, or family Maiadeae.
mail
A small piece of money; especially, an English silver half-penny of the time of Henry V.
maihem
See Maim, and Mayhem.
maikel
A South American carnivore of the genus Conepatus, allied to the skunk, but larger, and having a longer snout.
maim
To deprive of the use of a limb, so as to render a person on fighting less able either to defend himself or to annoy his adversary.
main
A hand or match at dice.
majestic
Possessing or exhibiting majesty; of august dignity, stateliness, or imposing grandeur; lofty; noble; grand.
maister
Principal; chief.
maize
A large species of American grass of the genus Zea (Z. Mays), widely cultivated as a forage and food plant; Indian corn.
majolica
A kind of pottery, with opaque glazing and showy, which reached its greatest perfection in Italy in the 16th century.
majusculae
Capital letters, as found in manuscripts of the sixth century and earlier.
maldanian
Any species of marine annelids of the genus Maldane, or family Maldanidae. They have a slender, round body, and make tubes in the sand or mud.
mala
Evils; wrongs; offenses against right and law.
make
A companion; a mate; often, a husband or a wife.
maki
A lemur. See Lemur.
malbrouck
A West African arboreal monkey (Cercopithecus cynosurus).
malcontent
Discontented; uneasy; dissatisfied; especially, dissatisfied with the government.
malkin
Originally, a kitchenmaid; a slattern.
male
Evil; wicked; bad.
malic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, apples; as, malic acid.
mall
A large heavy wooden beetle; a mallet for driving anything with force; a maul.
malmbrick
A kind of brick of a light brown or yellowish color, made of sand, clay, and chalk.
manbote
A sum paid to a lord as a pecuniary compensation for killing his man (that is, his vassal, servant, or tenant).
malvaceous
Pertaining to, or resembling, a natural order of plants (Malvaceae), of which the mallow is the type.
mathusian
A follower of Malthus.
malpighian
Of, pertaining to, or discovered by, Marcello Malpighi, an Italian anatomist of the 17th century.
malt
Barley or other grain, steeped in water and dried in a kiln, thus forcing germination until the saccharine principle has been evolved.
maltine
The fermentative principle of malt; malt diastase; also, a name given to various medicinal preparations made from or containing malt.
malum
An evil. See Mala.
mamma
Mother; -- word of tenderness and familiarity.
mamelon
A rounded hillock; a rounded elevation or protuberance.
mamillated
See Mammillated.
mamzer
A person born of relations between whom marriage was forbidden by the Mosaic law; a bastard.
manacle
A handcuff; a shackle for the hand or wrist; -- usually in the plural.
mamgabey
Any one of several African monkeys of the genus Cercocebus, as the sooty mangabey (C. fuliginosus), which is sooty black.
mane
The long and heavy hair growing on the upper side of, or about, the neck of some quadrupedal animals, as the horse, the lion, etc.
manchet
Fine white bread; a loaf of fine bread.
mandarin
A Chinese public officer or nobleman; a civil or military official in China and Annam.
manoeuvre
Management; dexterous movement; specif., a military or naval evolution, movement, or change of position.
manful
Showing manliness, or manly spirit; hence, brave, courageous, resolute, noble.
mania
Violent derangement of mind; madness; insanity.  Cf. Delirium.
manganate
A salt of manganic acid.
manhole
A hole through which a man may descend or creep into a drain, sewer, steam boiler, parts of machinery, etc.
manless
Destitute of men.
mankind
The human race; man, taken collectively.
manna
The food supplied to the Israelites in their journey through the wilderness of Arabia; hence, divinely supplied food.
margarate
A compound of the so-called margaric acid with a base.
maori
One of the aboriginal inhabitants of New Zealand; also, the original language of New Zealand.
manductor
A conductor; an officer in the ancient church who gave the signal for the choir to sing, and who beat time with the hand, and regulated the music.
manse
A dwelling house, generally with land attached.
manqueller
A killer of men; a manslayer.
manrent
Homage or service rendered to a superior, as to a lord; vassalage.
manta
See Coleoptera and Sea devil.
manu
One of a series of progenitors of human beings, and authors of human wisdom.
manx
Of or pertaining to the Isle of Man, or its inhabitants; as, the Manx language.
manul
A wild cat (Felis manul), having long, soft, light-colored fur. It is found in the mountains of Central Asia, and dwells among rocks.
manway
A small passageway, as in a mine, that a man may pass through.
many
A retinue of servants; a household.
manzanita
A name given to several species of Arctostaphylos, but mostly to A. glauca and A. pungens, shrubs of California, Oregon, etc.
marc
The refuse matter which remains after the pressure of fruit, particularly of grapes.
maqui
A Chilian shrub (Aristotelia Maqui). Its bark furnishes strings for musical instruments, and a medicinal wine is made from its berries.
maplike
Having or consisting of lines resembling a map; as, the maplike figures in which certain lichens grow.
mappery
The making, or study, of maps.
mara
The principal or ruling evil spirit.
marble
A massive, compact limestone; a variety of calcite, capable of being polished and used for architectural and ornamental purposes.
merchet
In old English and in Scots law, a fine paid to the lord of the soil by a tenant upon the marriage of one the tenant's daughters.
macher
One who marches.
marcher
The lord or officer who defended the marches or borders of a territory.
marching
A. & n., fr. March, v.
mare
The female of the horse and other equine quadrupeds.
marysole
A large British fluke, or flounder (Rhombus megastoma); -- called also carter, and whiff.
marplot
One who, by his officious /nterference, mars or frustrates a design or plot.
marl
To cover, as part of a rope, with marline, marking a pecular hitch at each turn to prevent unwinding.
marian
Pertaining to the Virgin Mary, or sometimes to Mary, Queen of England, daughter of Henry VIII.
mark
A license of reprisals. See Marque.
marmatite
A ferruginous variety of shalerite or zinc blende, nearly black in color.
marone
See Maroon, the color.
mars
The god of war and husbandry.
marque
A license to pass the limits of a jurisdiction, or boundary of a country, for the purpose of making reprisals.
marram
A coarse grass found on sandy beaches (Ammophila arundinacea). See Beach grass, under Beach.
mart
To buy or sell in, or as in, a mart.
marvel
That which causes wonder; a prodigy; a miracle.
mason
One whose occupation is to build with stone or brick; also, one who prepares stone for building purposes.
mash
A mass of mixed ingredients reduced to a soft pulpy state by beating or pressure; a mass of anything in a soft pulpy state.
mascagnite
Native sulphate of ammonia, found in volcanic districts; -- so named from Mascagni, who discovered it.
maselyn
A drinking cup. See 1st Maslin, 2.
mask
A cover, or partial cover, for the face, used for disguise or protection; as, a dancer's mask; a fencer's mask; a ball player's mask.
maslach
An excitant containing opium, much used by the Turks.
mast
The fruit of the oak and beech, or other forest trees; nuts; acorns.
masque
A mask; a masquerade.
mass
The sacrifice in the sacrament of the Eucharist, or the consecration and oblation of the host.
match
A person or thing equal or similar to another; one able to mate or cope with another; an equal; a mate.
matachin
An old dance with swords and bucklers; a sword dance.
mate
To confuse; to confound.
meazling
Falling in small drops; mistling; mizzing.
maya
The name for the doctrine of the unreality of matter, called, in English, idealism; hence, nothingness; vanity; illusion.
maul
A heavy wooden hammer or beetle.
maty
A native house servant in India.
matrass
A round-bottomed glass flask having a long neck; a bolthead.
math
A mowing, or that which is gathered by mowing; -- chiefly used in composition; as, an aftermath.
matico
A Peruvian plant (Piper, / Artanthe, elongatum), allied to the pepper, the leaves of which are used as a styptic and astringent.
mattages
A shrike or butcher bird; -- written also matagasse.
maturant
A medicine, or application, which promotes suppuration.
maud
A gray plaid; -- used by shepherds in Scotland.
matzoth
A cake of unleavened bread eaten by the Jews at the feast of the Passover.
maucaco
A lemur; -- applied to several species, as the White-fronted, the ruffed, and the ring-tailed lemurs.
muadlinism
A maudlin state.
maugre
In spite of; in opposition to; notwithstanding.
mavis
The European throstle or song thrush (Turdus musicus).
mausolean
Pertaining to a mausoleum; monumental.
maund
An East Indian weight, varying in different localities from 25 to about 82 pounds avoirdupois.
maurist
A member of the Congregation of Saint Maur, an offshoot of the Benedictines, originating in France in the early part of the seventeenth century.
mauther
A girl; esp., a great, awkward girl; a wench.
mauve
A color of a delicate purple, violet, or lilac.
mawseed
The seed of the opium poppy.
mawk
A slattern; a mawks.
mawmetry
The religion of Mohammed; also, idolatry. See Mawmet.
mawworm
Any intestinal worm found in the stomach, esp. the common round worm (Ascaris lumbricoides), and allied species.
maxilla
The bone of either the upper or the under jaw.
mazologist
One versed in mazology or mastology.
mayonnaise
A sauce compounded of raw yolks of eggs beaten up with olive oil to the consistency of a sirup, and seasoned with vinegar, pepper, salt, etc.
mayfish
A common American minnow (Fundulus majalis). See Minnow.
maybe
Perhaps; possibly; peradventure.
mayduke
A large dark-red cherry of excellent quality.
mayhap
Perhaps; peradventure.
maying
The celebrating of May Day.
mazdean
Of or pertaining to Ahura-Mazda, or Ormuzd, the beneficent deity in the Zoroastrian dualistic system; hence, Zoroastrian.
maypole
A tall pole erected in an open place and wreathed with flowers, about which the rustic May-day sports were had.
mazame
A goatlike antelope (Haplocerus montanus) which inhabits the Rocky Mountains, frequenting the highest parts; -- called also mountain goat.
maze
A wild fancy; a confused notion.
mazily
In a mazy manner.
meak
A hook with a long handle.
meach
To skulk; to cower. See Mich.
mazurka
A Polish dance, or the music which accompanies it, usually in 3-4 or 3-8 measure, with a strong accent on the second beat.
mazy
Perplexed with turns and windings; winding; intricate; confusing; perplexing; embarrassing; as, mazy error.
mead
A fermented drink made of water and honey with malt, yeast, etc.; metheglin; hydromel.
meagre
Destitue of, or having little, flesh; lean.
mear
A boundary. See Mere.
meal
A part; a fragment; a portion.
mean
To have in the mind, as a purpose, intention, etc.; to intend; to purpose; to design; as, what do you mean to do ?
meat
The flesh of animals used as food; esp., animal muscle; as, a breakfast of bread and fruit without meat.
mease
Five hundred; as, a mease of herrings.
meaw
See Mew, to cry as a cat.
meiny
A family, including servants, etc.; household; retinue; train.
medrick
A species of gull or tern.
medal
To honor or reward with a medal.
mechanic
The art of the application of the laws of motion or force to construction.
mecate
A rope of hair or of maguey fiber, for tying horses, etc.
meccawee
Of or pertaining to Mecca, in Arabia.
meckelian
Pertaining to, or discovered by, J. F. Meckel, a German anatomist.
meconate
A salt of meconic acid.
mediacy
The state or quality of being mediate.
meddle
To mix; to mingle.
mede
A native or inhabitant of Media in Asia.
medlar
A tree of the genus Mespilus (M. Germanica); also, the fruit of the tree. The fruit is something like a small apple, but has a bony endocarp.
medoc
A class of claret wines, including several varieties, from the district of Medoc in the department of Gironde.
megachile
A leaf-cutting bee of the genus Megachilus. See Leaf cutter, under Leaf.
meek
Mild of temper; not easily provoked or orritated; patient under injuries; not vain, or haughty, or resentful; forbearing; submissive.
medulla
Marrow; pith; hence, essence.
meed
That which is bestowed or rendered in consideration of merit; reward; recompense.
meer
Simple; unmixed. See Mere, a.
meet
To come up to; to be even with; to equal; to match; to satisfy; to ansver; as, to meet one's expectations; the supply meets the demand.
megohm
One of the larger measures of electrical resistance, amounting to one million ohms.
megerg
One of the larger measures of work, amounting to one million ergs; -- called also megalerg.
megilph
A gelatinous compound of linseed oil and mastic varnish, used by artists as a vehicle for colors.
megrim
A kind of sick or nevrous headache, usually periodical and confined to one side of the head.
meibomian
Of, pertaining to, or discovered by, Meibomius.
memnon
A celebrated Egyptian statue near Thebes, said to have the property of emitting a harplike sound at sunrise.
melocotoon
A kind of peach having one side deep red, and the flesh yellow.
meleagrine
Of or pertaining to the genus Meleagris.
meionite
A member of the scapolite, group, occuring in glassy crystals on Monte Somma, near Naples.
melaconite
An earthy black oxide of copper, arising from the decomposition of other ores.
meliaceous
Pertaining to a natural order (Meliacae) of plants of which the genus Melia is the type. It includes the mahogany and the Spanish cedar.
mell
To mix; to meddle.
member
To remember; to cause to remember; to mention.
melpomene
The Muse of tragedy.
melt
To reduce from a solid to a liquid state, as by heat; to liquefy; as, to melt wax, tallow, or lead; to melt ice or snow.
memento
A hint, suggestion, token, or memorial, to awaken memory; that which reminds or recalls to memory; a souvenir.
meminna
A small deerlet, or chevrotain, of India.
menhir
A large stone set upright in olden times as a memorial or monument. Many, of unknown date, are found in Brittany and throughout Northern Europe.
menace
The show of an intention to inflict evil; a threat or threatening; indication of a probable evil or catastrophe to come.
memoirs
A memorial of any individual; a biography; often, a biography written without special regard to method and completeness.
memphian
Of or pertaining to the ancient city of Memphis in Egypt; hence, Egyptian; as, Memphian darkness.
menild
Covered with spots; speckled; variegated.
mend
To alter for the better; to set right; to reform; hence, to quicken; as, to mend one's manners or pace.
mensal
Belonging to the table; transacted at table; as, mensal conversation.
menial
Belonging to a retinue or train of servants; performing servile office; serving.
menology
A register of months.
menu
The details of a banquet; a bill of fare.
mental
Of or pertaining to the chin; genian; as, the mental nerve; the mental region.
meow
See 6th and 7th Mew.
naid
Any one of numerous species of small, fresh-water, chaetopod annelids of the tribe Naidina. They belong to the Oligochaeta.
moloch
The fire god of the Ammonites in Canaan, to whom human sacrifices were offered; Molech. Also applied figuratively.
miohippus
An extinct Miocene mammal of the Horse family, closely related to the genus Anhithecrium, and having three usable hoofs on each foot.
mico
A small South American monkey (Mico melanurus), allied to the marmoset. The name was originally applied to an albino variety.
mesymnicum
A repetition at the end of a stanza.
mesa
A high tableland; a plateau on a hill.
merk
An old Scotch silver coin; a mark or marc.
mere
To divide, limit, or bound.
meracious
Being without mixture or adulteration; hence, strong; racy.
mercable
Capable of being bought or sold.
merganser
Any bird of the genus Merganser, and allied genera. They are allied to the ducks, but have a sharply serrated bill.
mericarp
One carpel of an umbelliferous fruit. See Cremocarp.
merocele
Hernia in the thigh; femoral hernia .
merle
The European blackbird. See Blackbird.
merman
The male corresponding to mermaid; a sea man, or man fish.
merrily
In a merry manner; with mirth; with gayety and laughter; jovially. See Mirth, and Merry.
merulidan
A bird of the Thrush family.
mesmeree
A person subjected to mesmeric influence; one who is mesmerized.
mesenchyma
The part of the mesoblast which gives rise to the connective tissues and blood.
mescal
A distilled liquor prepared in Mexico from a species of agave. See Agave.
mesdames
Pl. of Madame and Madam.
mesh
The opening or space inclosed by the threads of a net between knot and knot, or the threads inclosing such a space; network; a net.
mesiad
Toward, or on the side toward, the mesial plane; mesially; -- opposed to laterad.
mesquit
A name for two trees of the southwestern part of North America, the honey mesquite, and screw-pod mesquite.
mesoarium
The fold of peritoneum which suspends the ovary from the dorsal wall of the body cavity.
mesprise
Contempt; scorn.
mess
Mass; church service.
mestee
The offspring of a white person and a quadroon; -- so called in the West Indies.
mews
An alley where there are stables; a narrow passage; a confined place.
metic
A sojourner; an immigrant; an alien resident in a Grecian city, but not a citizen.
metre
A measure of length, equal to 39.37 English inches, the standard of linear measure in the metric system of weights and measures.
metabasis
A transition from one subject to another.
mete
To dream; also impersonally; as, me mette, I dreamed.
meterage
The act of measuring, or the cost of measuring.
methane
A light, colorless, gaseous, inflammable hydrocarbon, CH4; marsh gas. See Marsh gas, under Gas.
mette
Imp. of Mete, to dream.
metoche
The space between two dentils.
metric
Relating to measurement; involving, or proceeding by, measurement.
meute
A cage for hawks; a mew. See 4th Mew, 1.
mewl
To cry, as a young child; to squall.
miargyrite
A mineral of an iron-black color, and very sectile, consisting principally of sulphur, antimony, and silver.
mezuzoth
A piece of parchment bearing the Decalogue and attached to the doorpost; -- in use among orthodox Hebrews.
mexican
Of or pertaining to Mexico or its people.
mezereon
A small European shrub (Daphne Mezereum), whose acrid bark is used in medicine.
mezzo
Mean; not extreme.
miamis
A tribe of Indians that formerly occupied the country between the Wabash and Maumee rivers.
micaceous
Pertaining to, or containing, mica; splitting into laminae or leaves like mica.
mias
The orang-outang.
miaul
To cry as a cat; to mew; to caterwaul.
miche
To lie hid; to skulk; to act, or carry one's self, sneakingly.
micmacs
A tribe of Indians inhabiting Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.
milfoil
A common composite herb (Achillea Millefolium) with white flowers and finely dissected leaves; yarrow.
midship
Of or pertaining to, or being in, the middle of a ship.
midgard
The middle space or region between heaven and hell; the abode of human beings; the earth.
midbrain
The middle segment of the brain; the mesencephalon. See Brain.
micraster
A genus of sea urchins, similar to Spatangus, abounding in the chalk formation; -- from the starlike disposal of the ambulacral furrows.
mida
The larva of the bean fly.
midday
The middle part of the day; noon.
midfeather
A vertical water space in a fire box or combustion chamber.
midmain
The middle part of the main or sea.
midheaven
The midst or middle of heaven or the sky.
midland
Being in the interior country; distant from the coast or seashore; as, midland towns or inhabitants.
midnight
The middle of the night; twelve o'clock at night.
midrash
A talmudic exposition of the Hebrew law, or of some part of it.
migrant
A migratory bird or other animal.
miff
A petty falling out; a tiff; a quarrel; offense.
midward
Situated in the middle.
mien
Aspect; air; manner; demeanor; carriage; bearing.
mightily
In a mighty manner; with might; with great earnestness; vigorously; powerfully.
mignonette
A plant (Reseda odorata) having greenish flowers with orange-colored stamens, and exhaling a delicious fragrance.
milch
Giving milk; -- now applied only to beasts.
mikado
The popular designation of the hereditary sovereign of Japan.
milanese
Of or pertaining to Milan in Italy, or to its inhabitants.
milden
To make mild, or milder.
mile
A certain measure of distance, being equivalent in England and the United States to 320 poles or rods, or 5,280 feet.
mine
Belonging to me; my. Used as a pronominal to me; my. Used as a pronominal adjective in the predicate; as, "Vengeance is mine; I will repay.
mime
A kind of drama in which real persons and events were generally represented in a ridiculous manner.
mill
A money of account of the United States, having the value of the tenth of a cent, or the thousandth of a dollar.
miliaria
A fever accompanied by an eruption of small, isolated, red pimples, resembling a millet seed in form or size; miliary fever.
milk
A kind of juice or sap, usually white in color, found in certain plants; latex. See Latex.
milt
The spermatic fluid of fishes.
milvine
Of or resembling birds of the kite kind.
mina
An ancient weight or denomination of money, of varying value. The Attic mina was valued at a hundred drachmas.
mimical
Imitative; mimetic.
mimosa
A genus of leguminous plants, containing many species, and including the sensitive plants (Mimosa sensitiva, and M.
mince
To cut into very small pieces; to chop fine; to hash; as, to mince meat.
mind
Choice; inclination; liking; intent; will.
minor
Inferior in bulk, degree, importance, etc.; less; smaller; of little account; as, minor divisions of a body.
miniardize
To render delicate or dainty.
minge
To mingle; to mix.
minaceous
Of the color of minium or red lead; miniate.
mink
A carnivorous mammal of the genus Putorius, allied to the weasel. The European mink is Putorius lutreola.
minnow
Any of numerous small American cyprinodont fishes of the genus Fundulus, and related genera. They live both in fresh and in salt water.
minuend
The number from which another number is to be subtracted.
minstrelsy
The arts and occupation of minstrels; the singing and playing of a minstrel.
mint
The name of several aromatic labiate plants, mostly of the genus Mentha, yielding odoriferous essential oils by distillation.
miny
Abounding with mines; like a mine.
minx
A pert or a wanton girl.
miocene
Of or pertaining to the middle division of the Tertiary.
mixable
Capable of being mixed.
mismanage
To manage ill or improperly; as, to mismanage public affairs.
misbear
To carry improperly; to carry (one's self) wrongly; to misbehave.
mirk
Dark; gloomy; murky.
mirbane
See Nitrobenzene.
miquelet
An irregular or partisan soldier; a bandit.
mira
A remarkable variable star in the constellation Cetus (/ Ceti).
mire
Deep mud; wet, spongy earth.
mirifical
Working wonders; wonderful.
miry
Abounding with deep mud; full of mire; muddy; as, a miry road.
mirror
A looking-glass or a speculum; any glass or polished substance that forms images by the reflection of rays of light.
mirth
Merriment; gayety accompanied with laughter; jollity.
mirza
The common title of honor in Persia, prefixed to the surname of an individual. When appended to the surname, it signifies Prince.
misaccompt
To account or reckon wrongly.
mishandle
To handle ill or wrongly; to maltreat.
mise
The issue in a writ of right.
miscall
To call by a wrong name; to name improperly.
misdate
To date erroneously.
misfaith
Want of faith; distrust.
misget
To get wrongfully.
miskeep
To keep wrongly.
misimprove
To use for a bad purpose; to abuse; to misuse; as, to misimprove time, talents, advantages, etc.
misjoin
To join unfitly or improperly.
mislay
To lay in a wrong place; to ascribe to a wrong source.
mistake
To make or form amiss; to spoil in making.
miswander
To wander in a wrong path; to stray; to go astray.
miss
A title of courtesy prefixed to the name of a girl or a woman who has not been married. See Mistress, 5.
mispaint
To paint ill, or wrongly.
misname
To call by the wrong name; to give a wrong or inappropriate name to.
misobserve
To observe inaccurately; to mistake in observing.
misquote
To quote erroneously or incorrectly.
misraise
To raise or exite unreasonable.
mist
Visible watery vapor suspended in the atmosphere, at or near the surface of the earth; fog.
misspense
A spending improperly; a wasting.
misspent
Imp. & p. p. of Misspend.
misurato
Measured; -- a direction to perform a passage in strict or measured time.
misvalue
To value wrongly or too little; to undervalue.
mithras
The sun god of the Persians.
mite
A minute arachnid, of the order Acarina, of which there are many species; as, the cheese mite, sugar mite, harvest mite, etc.
misy
An impure yellow sulphate of iron; yellow copperas or copiapite.
miszealous
Mistakenly zealous.
mitre
A sort of base money or coin.
miterwort
Any plant of the genus Mitella, -- slender, perennial herbs with a pod slightly resembling a bishop's miter; bishop's cap.
mitraille
Shot or bits of iron used sometimes in loading cannon.
mitigable
Admitting of mitigation; that may be mitigated.
mitome
The denser part of the protoplasm of a cell.
mitu
A South American curassow of the genus Mitua.
mitt
A mitten; also, a covering for the wrist and hand and not for the fingers.
mity
Having, or abounding with, mites.
moelline
An unguent for the hair.
moble
To wrap the head of in a hood.
mnemonical
Assisting in memory.
mixtion
A kind of cement made of mastic, amber, etc., used as a mordant for gold leaf.
mixed
Formed by mixing; united; mingled; blended. See Mix, v. t. & i.
mixogamous
Pairing with several males; -- said of certain fishes of which several males accompany each female during spawning.
mizmaze
A maze or labyrinth.
mizzen
Hindmost; nearest the stern; as, the mizzen shrouds, sails, etc.
moat
A deep trench around the rampart of a castle or other fortified place, sometimes filled with water; a ditch.
moabite
One of the posterity of Moab, the son of Lot. (Gen. xix. 37.) Also used adjectively.
moan
To make a low prolonged sound of grief or pain, whether articulate or not; to groan softly and continuously.
mobbish
Like a mob; tumultuous; lawless; as, a mobbish act.
mobile
Capable of being moved; not fixed in place or condition; movable.
modal
Of or pertaining to a mode or mood; consisting in mode or form only; relating to form; having the form without the essence or reality.
mocha
A seaport town of Arabia, on the Red Sea.
mobocracy
A condition in which the lower classes of a nation control public affairs without respect to law, precedents, or vested rights.
moccasin
A shoe made of deerskin, or other soft leather, the sole and upper part being one piece. It is the customary shoe worn by the American Indians.
mock
To imitate; to mimic; esp., to mimic in sport, contempt, or derision; to deride by mimicry.
moco
A South American rodent (Cavia rupestris), allied to the Guinea pig, but larger; -- called also rock cavy.
modocs
A tribe of warlike Indians formerly inhabiting Northern California. They are nearly extinct.
mode
Manner of doing or being; method; form; fashion; custom; way; style; as, the mode of speaking; the mode of dressing.
modicity
Moderateness; smallness; meanness.
modular
Of or pertaining to mode, modulation, module, or modius; as, modular arrangement; modular accent; modular measure.
moebles
Movables; furniture; -- also used in the singular (moeble).
moil
To daub; to make dirty; to soil; to defile.
moho
A gallinule (Notornis Mantelli) formerly inhabiting New Zealand, but now supposed to be extinct. It was incapable of flight.
mogul
A person of the Mongolian race.
moff
A thin silk stuff made in Caucasia.
moggan
A closely fitting knit sleeve; also, a legging of knitted material.
moha
A kind of millet (Setaria Italica); German millet.
mohicans
A tribe of Lenni-Lenape Indians who formerly inhabited Western Connecticut and Eastern New York.
muharram
The first month of the Mohammedan year.
mohr
A West African gazelle (Gazella mohr), having horns on which are eleven or twelve very prominent rings.
mohur
A British Indian gold coin, of the value of fifteen silver rupees, or $7.21.
moidore
A gold coin of Portugal, valued at about 27s. sterling.
moiety
One of two equal parts; a half; as, a moiety of an estate, of goods, or of profits; the moiety of a jury, or of a nation.
moky
Misty; dark; murky; muggy.
moist
Moderately wet; damp; humid; not dry; as, a moist atmosphere or air.
moineau
A small flat bastion, raised in the middle of an overlong curtain.
moira
The deity who assigns to every man his lot.
moither
To perplex; to confuse.
moke
A mesh of a net, or of anything resembling a net.
mould
Crumbling, soft, friable earth; esp., earth containing the remains or constituents of organic matter, and suited to the growth of plants; soil.
molar
Of or pertaining to a mass of matter; -- said of the properties or motions of masses, as distinguished from those of molecules or atoms.
mold
A spot; a blemish; a mole.
moliminous
Of great bulk or consequence; very important.
mole
A spot; a stain; a mark which discolors or disfigures.
moll
Minor; in the minor mode; as, A moll, that is, A minor.
mulada
A drove of mules.
moslem
A Mussulman; an orthodox Mohammedan. [Written also muslim.]
mopish
Dull; spiritless; dejected.
monk
A piece of tinder made of agaric, used in firing the powder hose or train of a mine.
momus
The god of mockery and censure.
moly
A kind of garlic (Allium Moly) with large yellow flowers; -- called also golden garlic.
moult
To shed or cast the hair, feathers, skin, horns, or the like, as an animal or a bird.
moltable
Capable of assuming a molten state; meltable; fusible.
mome
A dull, silent person; a blockhead.
momier
A name given in contempt to strict Calvinists in Switzerland, France, and some parts of Germany, in the early part of the 19th century.
monecious
See Monoecian, and Monoecious.
mona
A small, handsome, long-tailed West American monkey (Cercopithecus mona). The body is dark olive, with a spot of white on the haunches.
monday
The second day of the week; the day following Sunday.
monger
A trader; a dealer; -- now used chiefly in composition; as, fishmonger, ironmonger, newsmonger.
moniliform
Joined or constricted, at regular intervals, so as to resemble a string of beads; as, a moniliform root; a moniliform antenna.
moon
A secondary planet, or satellite, revolving about any member of the solar system; as, the moons of Jupiter or Saturn.
montanic
Of or pertaining to mountains; consisting of mountains.
mono
The black howler of Central America (Mycetes villosus).
monsieur
The common title of civility in France in speaking to, or of, a man; Mr. or Sir.
monument
Something which stands, or remains, to keep in remembrance what is past; a memorial.
mood
Manner; style; mode; logical form; musical style; manner of action or being. See Mode which is the preferable form).
moot
A ring for gauging wooden pins.
moor
One of a mixed race inhabiting Morocco, Algeria, Tunis, and Tripoli, chiefly along the coast and in towns.
moose
A large cervine mammal (Alces machlis, or A. Americanus), native of the Northern United States and Canada.
mopboard
A narrow board nailed against the wall of a room next to the floor; skirting board; baseboard. See Baseboard.
mope
To be dull and spiritless.
moria
Idiocy; imbecility; fatuity; foolishness.
mora
A game of guessing the number of fingers extended in a quick movement of the hand, -- much played by Italians of the lower classes.
mopsy
A slatternly, untidy woman.
moplah
One of a class of Mohammedans in Malabar.
moppet
A rag baby; a puppet made of cloth; hence, also, in fondness, a little girl, or a woman.
mopus
A mope; a drone.
moquette
A kind of carpet having a short velvety pile.
mordacious
Biting; given to biting; hence, figuratively, sarcastic; severe; scathing.
morbid
Of or pertaining to disease or diseased parts; as, morbid anatomy.
morceau
A bit; a morsel.
more
Greater; superior; increased
morgay
The European small-spotted dogfish, or houndfish. See the Note under Houndfish.
morrice
Dancing the morrice; dancing.
morn
The first part of the day; the morning; -- used chiefly in poetry.
morkin
A beast that has died of disease or by mischance.
mormal
A bad sore; a gangrene; a cancer.
moro
A small abscess or tumor having a resemblance to a mulberry.
morphean
Of or relating to Morpheus, to dreams, or to sleep.
morulation
The process of cleavage, or segmentation, of the ovum, by which a morula is formed.
morse
The walrus. See Walrus.
mort
A great quantity or number.
moschatel
A plant of the genus Adoxa (A. moschatellina), the flowers of which are pale green, and have a faint musky smell.
mosaic
A surface decoration made by inlaying in patterns small pieces of variously colored glass, stone, or other material; -- called also mosaic work.
moselle
A light wine, usually white, produced in the vicinity of the river Moselle.
moxa
A plant from which this substance is obtained, esp.  Artemisia Chinensis, and A. moxa.
mouldy
See Mold, Molder, Moldy, etc.
moth
Any nocturnal lepidopterous insect, or any not included among the butterflies; as, the luna moth; Io moth; hawk moth.
most
Consisting of the greatest number or quantity; greater in number or quantity than all the rest; nearly all.
mosque
A Mohammedan church or place of religious worship.
moss
A bog; a morass; a place containing peat; as, the mosses of the Scottish border.
motacil
Any singing bird of the genus Motacilla; a wagtail.
mote
A meeting of persons for discussion; as, a wardmote in the city of London.
motmot
Any one of several species of long-tailed, passerine birds of the genus Momotus, having a strong serrated beak.
motific
Producing motion.
motley
Variegated in color; consisting of different colors; dappled; party-colored; as, a motley coat.
moton
A small plate covering the armpit in armor of the 14th century and later.
motte
A clump of trees in a prairie.
move
To transfer (a piece or man) from one space or position to another, according to the rules of the game; as, to move a king.
mouse
Any one of numerous species of small rodents belonging to the genus Mus and various related genera of the family Muridae.
moun
Pl. of Mow, may.
mourn
To express or to feel grief or sorrow; to grieve; to be sorrowful; to lament; to be in a state of grief or sadness.
moutan
The Chinese tree peony (Paeonia Mountan), a shrub with large flowers of various colors.
movable
Changing from one time to another; as, movable feasts, i. e., church festivals, the date of which varies from year to year.
mowe
See 1st & 2d Mow.
moving
Changing place or posture; causing motion or action; as, a moving car, or power.
mowburn
To heat and ferment in the mow, as hay when housed too green.
mowing
The act of one who, or the operation of that which, mows.
mown
Cut down by mowing, as grass; deprived of grass by mowing; as, a mown field.
muculent
Slimy; moist, and moderately viscous.
muce
See Muse, and Muset.
moyle
See Moil, and Moile.
moxie
Courage, determination.
moya
Mud poured out from volcanoes during eruptions; -- so called in South America.
mozzetta
A cape, with a small hood; -- worn by the pope and other dignitaries of the Roman Catholic Church.
mucamide
The acid amide of mucic acid, obtained as a white crystalline substance.
muck
Abbreviation of Amuck.
much
Great in quantity; long in duration; as, much rain has fallen; much time.
mucic
Pertaining to, or derived from, gums and micilaginous substances; specif., denoting an acid obtained by the oxidation of gums, dulcite, etc.
mucoid
Resembling mucus.
mucro
A minute abrupt point, as of a leaf; any small, sharp point or process, terminating a larger part or organ.
muezzin
A Mohammedan crier of the hour of prayer.
mudfish
The European loach.
mudar
Either one of two asclepiadaceous shrubs (Calotropis gigantea, and C. procera), which furnish a strong and valuable fiber.
muddily
In a muddy manner; turbidly; without mixture; cloudily; obscurely; confusedly.
mudhole
A hole, or hollow place, containing mud, as in a road.
mudwall
The European bee-eater. See Bee-eater.
muggard
Sullen; displeased.
muff
A soft cover of cylindrical form, usually of fur, worn by women to shield the hands from cold.
mufti
An official expounder of Mohammedan law.
mugient
Lowing; bellowing.
mughouse
An alehouse; a pothouse.
mugweed
A slender European weed (Galium Cruciata); -- called also crossweed.
mutter
To sound with a low, rumbling noise.
muriate
A salt of muriatic hydrochloric acid; a chloride; as, muriate of ammonia.
mumm
To sport or make diversion in a mask or disguise; to mask.
moolley
A mulley or polled animal.
mule
A hybrid animal; specifically, one generated between an ass and a mare, sometimes a horse and a she-ass.
mulberry
The berry or fruit of any tree of the genus Morus; also, the tree itself. See Morus.
mulch
Half-rotten straw, or any like substance strewn on the ground, as over the roots of plants, to protect from heat, drought, etc.
muliebrity
The state of being a woman or of possessing full womanly powers; womanhood; -- correlate of virility.
mull
A thin, soft kind of muslin.
mulse
Wine boiled and mingled with honey.
mulligrubs
A griping of the intestines; colic.
mulmul
A fine, soft muslin; mull.
multiaxial
Having more than one axis; developing in more than a single line or plain; -- opposed to monoaxial.
mumble
To chew something gently with closed lips.
municipal
Of or pertaining to a city or a corporation having the right of administering local government; as, municipal rights; municipal officers.
mundane
Of or pertaining to the world; worldly; earthly; terrestrial; as, the mundane sphere.
mump
To move the lips with the mouth closed; to mumble, as in sulkiness.
munch
To chew with a grinding, crunching sound, as a beast chews provender; to chew deliberately or in large mouthfuls.
munnerary
Having the nature of a gift.
mung
Green gram, a kind of pulse (Phaseolus Mungo), grown for food in British India.
murage
A tax or toll paid for building or repairing the walls of a fortified town.
munjeet
See Indian madder, under Madder.
murenoid
Like or pertaining to the genus Muraena, or family Muraenidae.
murder
The offense of killing a human being with malice prepense or aforethought, express or implied; intentional and unlawful homicide.
mure
To inclose in walls; to wall; to immure; to shut up.
music
Melody; a rhythmical and otherwise agreeable succession of tones.
murth
Plenty; abundance.
murmur
A low, confused, and indistinct sound, like that of running water.
murk
The refuse of fruit, after the juice has been expressed; marc.
murlins
A seaweed. See Baddrelocks.
murnival
In the game of gleek, four cards of the same value, as four aces or four kings; hence, four of anything.
murrain
An infectious and fatal disease among cattle.
musca
A genus of dipterous insects, including the common house fly, and numerous allied species.
murza
One of the hereditary nobility among the Tatars, esp. one of the second class.
musa
A genus of perennial, herbaceous, endogenous plants of great size, including the banana (Musa sapientum), the plantain (M.
muse
A gap or hole in a hedge, hence, wall, or the like, through which a wild animal is accustomed to pass; a muset.
mush
Meal (esp. Indian meal) boiled in water; hasty pudding; supawn.
muss
A scramble, as when small objects are thrown down, to be taken by those who can seize them; a confused struggle.
musomania
See Musicomania.
musk
The musk deer. See Musk deer (below).
muslin
A thin cotton, white, dyed, or printed. The name is also applied to coarser and heavier cotton goods; as, shirting and sheeting muslins.
musquaw
The American black bear. See Bear.
musrol
The nose band of a horse's bridle.
mutch
The close linen or muslin cap of an old woman.
must
The expressed juice of the grape, or other fruit, before fermentation.
mutable
Capable of alteration; subject to change; changeable in form, qualities, or nature.
mute
To cast off; to molt.
muchkin
A liquid measure equal to four gills, or an imperial pint.
muticous
Without a point or pointed process; blunt.
myriad
The number of ten thousand; ten thousand persons or things.
mylodon
An extinct genus of large slothlike American edentates, allied to Megatherium.
myaria
A division of bivalve mollusks of which the common clam (Mya) is the type.
muzarab
One of a denomination of Christians formerly living under the government of the Moors in Spain, and having a liturgy and ritual of their own.
mutual
Possessed, experienced, or done by two or more persons or things at the same time; common; joint; as, mutual happiness; a mutual effort.
muxy
Soft; sticky, and dirty.
muzziness
The state or quality of being muzzy.
myalgia
Pain in the muscles; muscular rheumatism or neuralgia.
mydatoxin
A poisonous amido acid, C6H13NO2, separated by Brieger from decaying horseflesh. In physiological action, it is similar to curare.
mycelium
The white threads or filamentous growth from which a mushroom or fungus is developed; the so-called mushroom spawn.
mycoderma
A genus of microorganisms of which the acetic ferment (Mycoderma aceti), which converts alcoholic fluids into vinegar, is a representative.
mydriasis
A long-continued or excessive dilatation of the pupil of the eye.
myelin
One of a group of phosphorized principles occurring in nerve tissue, both in the brain and nerve fibers.
myoid
Composed of, or resembling, muscular fiber.
mynheer
The Dutch equivalent of Mr. or Sir; hence, a Dutchman.
myna
Any one of numerous species of Asiatic starlings of the genera Acridotheres, Sturnopastor, Sturnia, Gracula, and allied genera.
mynchery
A nunnery; -- a term still applied to the ruins of certain nunneries in England.
myocardium
The main substance of the muscular wall of the heart inclosed between the epicardium and endocardium.
myogalid
One of the Myogalodae, a family of Insectivora, including the desman, and allied species.
myopathia
Any affection of the muscles or muscular system.
myolin
The essential material of muscle fibers.
myoma
A tumor consisting of muscular tissue.
myosis
Long-continued contraction of the pupil of the eye.
myotic
Producing myosis, or contraction of the pupil of the eye, as opium, calabar bean, etc.
myzontes
The Marsipobranchiata.
mytacism
Too frequent use of the letter m, or of the sound represented by it.
myrrh
A gum resin, usually of a yellowish brown or amber color, of an aromatic odor, and a bitter, slightly pungent taste.
myrmicine
Of or pertaining to Myrmica, a genus of ants including the small house ant (M. molesta), and many others.
myronic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, mustard; -- used specifically to designate a glucoside called myronic acid, found in mustard seed.
myrtaceous
Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a large and important natural order of trees and shrubs (Myrtaceae), of which the myrtle is the type.
mystacal
Of or pertaining to the upper lip, or mustache.
myxa
The distal end of the mandibles of a bird.
myth
A person or thing existing only in imagination, or whose actual existence is not verifiable.
mytiloid
Like, or pertaining to, the genus Mytilus, or family Mytilidae.
myxine
A genus of marsipobranchs, including the hagfish. See Hag, 4.
myxoma
A tumor made up of a gelatinous tissue resembling that found in the umbilical cord.
nadir
The lowest point; the time of greatest depression.
nabob
A deputy or viceroy in India; a governor of a province of the ancient Mogul empire.
nabit
Pulverized sugar candy.
nabk
The edible berries of the Zizyphys Lotus, a tree of Northern Africa, and Southwestern Europe.
nacarat
A pale red color, with a cast of orange.
nacre
A pearly substance which lines the interior of many shells, and is most perfect in the mother-of-pearl.
nagging
Fault-finding; teasing; persistently annoying; as, a nagging toothache.
naevoid
Resembling a naevus or naevi; as, naevoid elephantiasis.
navus
A spot or mark on the skin of children when born; a birthmark; -- usually applied to vascular tumors, i.
nagyagite
A mineral of blackish lead-gray color and metallic luster, generally of a foliated massive structure; foliated tellurium.
nagor
A West African gazelle (Gazella redunca).
naiad
A water nymph; one of the lower female divinities, fabled to preside over some body of fresh water, as a lake, river, brook, or fountain.
nitranilic
Of, pertaining to, or designating, a complex organic acid produced as a white crystalline substance by the action of nitrous acid on hydroquinone.
nemaline
Having the form of threads; fibrous.
naumachy
A naval battle; esp., a mock sea fight.
nard
An East Indian plant (Nardostachys Jatamansi) of the Valerian family, used from remote ages in Oriental perfumery.
nanny
A diminutive of Ann or Anne, the proper name.
naked
Having no clothes on; uncovered; nude; bare; as, a naked body; a naked limb; a naked sword.
nail
The horny scale of plate of epidermis at the end of the fingers and toes of man and many apes.
naif
Having a true natural luster without being cut; -- applied by jewelers to a precious stone.
naik
A chief; a leader; a Sepoy corporal.
nainsook
A thick sort of jaconet muslin, plain or striped, formerly made in India.
naive
Having native or unaffected simplicity; ingenuous; artless; frank; as, naive manners; a naive person; naive and unsophisticated remarks.
name
The title by which any person or thing is known or designated; a distinctive specific appellation, whether of an individual or a class.
nale
Ale; also, an alehouse.
namable
Capable of being named.
nandine
An African carnivore (Nandinia binotata), allied to the civets. It is spotted with black.
nankeen
An imitation of this cloth by artificial coloring.
napkin
A little towel, or small cloth, esp. one for wiping the fingers and mouth at table.
naphthalic
Formerly, designating an acid probably identical with phthalic acid.
naos
A term used by modern archaeologists instead of cella. See Cella.
nape
The back part of the neck.
naperian
Of, pertaining to, or discovered by, Napier, or Naper.
napiform
Turnip-shaped; large and round in the upper part, and very slender below.
nappiness
The quality of having a nap; abundance of nap, as on cloth.
napless
Without nap; threadbare.
napoleon
A French gold coin of twenty francs, or about $3.86.
napu
A very small chevrotain (Tragulus Javanicus), native of Java. It is about the size of a hare, and is noted for its agility in leaping.
narceine
An alkaloid found in small quantities in opium, and extracted as a white crystalline substance of a bitter astringent taste.
nastily
In a nasty manner.
nascal
A kind of pessary of medicated wool or cotton, formerly used.
narrable
Capable of being narrated or told.
nargileh
An apparatus for smoking tobacco. It has a long flexible tube, and the smoke is drawn through water.
narica
The brown coati. See Coati.
narthex
A tall umbelliferous plant (Ferula communis). See Giant fennel, under Fennel.
nasal
Of or pertaining to the nose.
nasiform
Having the shape of a nose.
naseberry
A tropical fruit. See Sapodilla.
nash
Firm; stiff; hard; also, chilly.
nasobuccal
Connected with both the nose and the mouth; as, the nasobuccal groove in the skate.
nassa
Any species of marine gastropods, of the genera Nassa, Tritia, and other allied genera of the family Nassidae; a dog whelk.
natica
Any one of numerous species of marine gastropods belonging to Natica, Lunatia, Neverita, and other allied genera (family Naticidae.
natch
The rump of beef; esp., the lower and back part of the rump.
nasute
Having a nice sense of smell.
natal
Of or pertaining to one's birth; accompying or dating from one's birth; native.
nates
The two anterior of the four lobes on the dorsal side of the midbrain of most mammals; the anterior optic lobes.
nathmore
Not the more; never the more.
natter
To find fault; to be peevish.
natka
A species of shrike.
natrium
The technical name for sodium.
naufrage
Shipwreck; ruin.
natural
Conformed to truth or reality
naught
The arithmetical character 0; a cipher. See Cipher.
necessary
Such as must be; impossible to be otherwise; not to be avoided; inevitable.
nazarene
A native or inhabitant of Nazareth; -- a term of contempt applied to Christ and the early Christians.
navvy
Originally, a laborer on canals for internal navigation; hence, a laborer on other public works, as in building railroads, embankments, etc.
navajoes
A tribe of Indians inhabiting New Mexico and Arizona, allied to the Apaches. They are now largely engaged in agriculture.
nauscopy
The power or act of discovering ships or land at considerable distances.
nautch
An entertainment consisting chiefly of dancing by professional dancing (or Nautch) girls.
nave
The block in the center of a wheel, from which the spokes radiate, and through which the axle passes; -- called also hub or hob.
navicular
Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a boat or ship.
nayaur
A specied of wild sheep (Ovis Hodgsonii), native of Nepaul and Thibet. It has a dorsal mane and a white ruff beneath the neck.
navy
A fleet of ships; an assemblage of merchantmen, or so many as sail in company.
nawab
A deputy ruler or viceroy in India; also, a title given by courtesy to other persons of high rank in the East.
nayt
To refuse; to deny.
nayward
The negative side.
neatness
The state or quality of being neat.
neap
The tongue or pole of a cart or other vehicle drawn by two animals.
naze
A promotory or headland.
neal
To be tempered by heat.
near
At a little distance, in place, time, manner, or degree; not remote; nigh.
neat
Cattle of the genus Bos, as distinguished from horses, sheep, and goats; an animal of the genus Bos; as, a neat's tongue; a neat's foot.
nebula
A white spot or a slight opacity of the cornea.
neatress
A woman who takes care of cattle.
nebalia
A genus of small marine Crustacea, considered the type of a distinct order (Nebaloidea, or Phyllocarida.
nebulation
The condition of being nebulated; also, a clouded, or ill-defined, color mark.
nebule
A little cloud; a cloud.
neginoth
Stringed instruments.
neddy
A pet name for a donkey.
neckmould
A small convex molding surrounding a column at the jinction of the shaft and capital.
neck
The part of an animal which connects the head and the trunk, and which, in man and many other animals, is more slender than the trunk.
necklaced
Wearing a necklace; marked as with a necklace.
necrolatry
The worship of the dead; manes worship.
nectar
The drink of the gods (as ambrosia was their food); hence, any delicious or inspiring beverage.
needler
One who makes or uses needles; also, a dealer in needles.
need
A state that requires supply or relief; pressing occasion for something; necessity; urgent want.
needleful
As much thread as is used in a needle at one time.
nefandous
Unfit to speak of; unmentionable; impious; execrable.
negative
Asserting absence of connection between a subject and a predicate; as, a negative proposition.
nehushtan
A thing of brass; -- the name under which the Israelites worshiped the brazen serpent made by Moses.
negress
A black woman; a female negro.
neglect
Not to attend to with due care or attention; to forbear one's duty in regard to; to suffer to pass unimproved, unheeded, undone, etc.
negoce
Business; occupation.
negus
A beverage made of wine, water, sugar, nutmeg, and lemon juice; -- so called, it is said, from its first maker, Colonel Negus.
nehiloth
A term supposed to mean, perforated wind instruments of music, as pipes or flutes.
neighbor
To dwell in the vicinity; to be a neighbor, or in the neighborhood; to be near.
neife
A woman born in the state of villeinage; a female serf.
neigh
To utter the cry of the horse; to whinny.
neither
Not either; not the one or the other.
neishout
The mahogany-like wood of the South African tree Pteroxylon utile, the sawdust of which causes violent sneezing (whence the name).
nelumbo
A genus of great water lilies. The North American species is Nelumbo lutea, the Asiatic is the sacred lotus, N.
newsboy
A boy who distributes or sells newspaper.
nero
A Roman emperor notorius for debauchery and barbarous cruelty; hence, any profligate and cruel ruler or merciless tyrant.
neophyte
A novice; a tyro; a beginner in anything.
neocarida
The modern, or true, Crustacea, as distinguished from the Merostomata.
nempne
To name or call.
nemean
Of or pertaining to Nemea, in Argolis, where the ancient Greeks celebrated games, and Hercules killed a lion.
nemophily
Fondness for forest scenery; love of the woods.
nenia
A funeral song; an elegy.
nenuphar
The great white water lily of Europe; the Nymphaea alba.
neolithic
Of or pertaining to, or designating, an era characterized by late remains in stone.
neodamode
In ancient Sparta, one of those Helots who were freed by the state in reward for military service.
neogaean
Of or pertaining to the New World, or Western Hemisphere.
neomenia
The time of the new moon; the beginning of the month in the lunar calendar.
neonomian
One who advocates adheres to new laws; esp. one who holds or believes that the gospel is a new law.
nepenthe
A drug used by the ancients to give relief from pain and sorrow; -- by some supposed to have been opium or hasheesh.
neoterical
Recent in origin; modern; new.
neorama
A panorama of the interior of a building, seen from within.
neossine
The substance constituting the edible bird's nest.
neozoic
More recent than the Paleozoic, -- that is, including the Mesozoic and Cenozoic.
nepaulese
Of or pertaining to Nepaul, a kingdom in Northern Hindostan.
neptune
The son of Saturn and Ops, the god of the waters, especially of the sea.  He is represented as bearing a trident for a scepter.
nephalism
Total abstinence from spirituous liquor.
nepotal
Of or relating to a nephew.
nereid
Any species of Nereis. The word is sometimes used for similar annelids of other families.
nerita
A genus of marine gastropods, mostly natives of warm climates.
neurosis
A functional nervous affection or disease, that is, a disease of the nerves without any appreciable change of nerve structure.
nethermost
Lowest; as, the nethermost abyss.
nesh
Soft; tender; delicate.
nervation
The arrangement of nerves and veins, especially those of leaves; neuration.
nescience
Want of knowledge; ignorance; agnosticism.
ness
A promontory; a cape; a headland.
nest
The bed or receptacle prepared by a fowl for holding her eggs and for hatching and rearing her young.
network
Any system of lines or channels interlacing or crossing like the fabric of a net; as, a network of veins; a network of railroads.
netify
To render neat; to clean; to put in order.
netting
The act or process of making nets or network, or of forming meshes, as for fancywork, fishing nets, etc.
neurad
Toward the neural side; -- opposed to haemad.
neropteral
Of or pertaining to the Neuroptera.
newel
A novelty; a new thing.
nevadite
A grantitoid variety of rhyolite, common in Nevada.
neuter
Neither the one thing nor the other; on neither side; impartial; neutral.
neuvaines
Prayers offered up for nine successive days.
neve
The upper part of a glacier, above the limit or perpetual snow. See Galcier.
newcomer
One who has lately come.
newly
Lately; recently.
newfangle
Eager for novelties; desirous of changing.
newish
Somewhat new; nearly new.
newness
The quality or state of being new; as, the newness of a system; the newness of a scene; newness of life.
newmarket
A long, closely fitting cloak.
news
Something strange or newly happened.
niellist
One who practices the style of ornamentation called niello.
niche
A cavity, hollow, or recess, generally within the thickness of a wall, for a statue, bust, or other erect ornament.
nias
A young hawk; an eyas; hence, an unsophisticated person.
nexible
That may be knit together.
newsman
One who brings news.
newtonian
Of or pertaining to Sir Isaac Newton, or his discoveries.
next
Nearest in place; having no similar object intervening.
nexus
Connection; tie.
nicagua
The laughing falcon. See under laughing.
nibbed
Having a nib or point.
niblick
A kind of golf stick used to lift the ball out of holes, ruts, etc.
niccolite
A mineral of a copper-red color and metallic luster; an arsenide of nickel; -- called also coppernickel, kupfernickel.
nice
Foolish; silly; simple; ignorant; also, weak; effeminate.
nidgery
A trifle; a piece of foolery.
nictate
To wink; to nictitate.
nick
An evil spirit of the waters.
nicolaitan
One of certain corrupt persons in the early church at Ephesus, who are censured in rev. ii. 6, 15.
nidamental
Of, pertaining to, or baring, eggs or egg capsules; as, the nidament capsules of certain gastropods; nidamental glands.
nide
A nestful; a brood; as, a nide of pheasants.
nidulant
Nestling, as a bird in itss nest.
niding
A coward; a dastard; -- a term of utmost opprobrium.
nidor
Scent or savor of meat or food, cooked or cooking.
niece
A relative, in general; especially, a descendant, whether male or female; a granddaughter or a grandson.
nief
See Neif, the fist.
nincompoop
A fool; a silly or stupid person.
nihilism
Nothingness; nihility.
nigger
A negro; -- in vulgar derision or depreciation.
niggard
A person meanly close and covetous; one who spends grudgingly; a stingy, parsimonous fellow; a miser.
nigged
Hammer-dressed; -- said of building stone.
nigh
Not distant or remote in place or time; near.
nigrescent
Growing black; changing to a black color; approaching to blackness.
nilometer
An instrument for measuring the rise of water in the Nile during its periodical flood.
nile
The great river of Egypt.
nill
Not to will; to refuse; to reject.
nimble
Light and quick in motion; moving with ease and celerity; lively; swift.
nimiety
State of being in excess.
nipper
One who, or that which, nips.
ninth
Following the eight and preceding the tenth; coming after eight others.
nine
Eight and one more; one less than ten; as, nine miles.
ninny
A fool; a simpleton.
niobe
The daughter of Tantalus, and wife of Amphion, king of Thebes. Her pride in her children provoked Apollo and Diana, who slew them all.
niopo
A kind of snuff prepared by the natives of Venezuela from the roasted seeds of a leguminous tree (Piptadenia peregrina), thence called niopo tree.
nisus
A striving; an effort; a conatus.
nisan
The first month of the jewish ecclesiastical year, formerly answering nearly to the month of April, now to March, of the Christian calendar.
niste
Wist not; knew not.
nitre
A white crystalline semitransparent salt; potassium nitrate; saltpeter. See Saltpeter.
nitency
Brightness; luster.
nitid
Bright; lustrous; shining.
noyau
A cordial of brandy, etc., flavored with the kernel of the bitter almond, or of the peach stone, etc.
nontenure
A plea of a defendant that he did not hold the land, as affirmed.
noematical
Of or pertaining to the understanding.
nocake
Indian corn parched, and beaten to powder, -- used for food by the Northern American Indians.
noachian
Of or pertaining to the patriarch Noah, or to his time.
niveous
Snowy; resembling snow; partaking of the qualities of snow.
nitter
The horselouse; an insect that deposits nits on horses.
nival
Abounding with snow; snowy.
nivose
The fourth month of the French republican calendar [1792-1806]. It commenced December 21, and ended January 19.
nizam
The title of the native sovereigns of Hyderabad, in India, since 1719.
nobiliary
Of or pertaining to the nobility.
noah
A patriarch of Biblical history, in the time of the Deluge.
nobbily
In a nobby manner.
noble
Grand; stately; magnificent; splendid; as, a noble edifice.
nobody
No person; no one; not anybody.
nodal
Of the nature of, or relating to, a node; as, a nodal point.
nock
The upper fore corner of a boom sail or of a trysail.
nocent
Doing hurt, or having a tendency to hurt; hurtful; mischievous; noxious; as, nocent qualities.
nocive
Hurtful; injurious.
noctidial
Comprising a night and a day; a noctidial day.
nocument
Harm; injury; detriment.
nodical
Of or pertaining to the nodes; from a node to the same node again; as, the nodical revolutions of the moon.
nodder
One who nods; a drowsy person.
node
A knot, a knob; a protuberance; a swelling.
nodosarine
Resembling in form or structure a foraminiferous shell of the genus Nodosaria.
nodular
Of, pertaining to, or in the form of, a nodule or knot.
nomic
Customary; ordinary; -- applied to the usual English spelling, in distinction from strictly phonetic methods.
noise
Sound of any kind.
noie
To annoy. See Noy.
noetian
One of the followers of Noetus, who lived in the third century. He denied the distinct personality of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
noggen
Made of hemp; hence, hard; rough; harsh.
noils
Waste and knots of wool removed by the comb; combings.
noious
Annoying; troublesome.
noma
See Canker, n., 1.
nolition
Adverse action of will; unwillingness; -- opposed to volition.
noll
The head; the noddle.
nombles
The entrails of a deer; the umbles.
nome
A province or political division, as of modern Greece or ancient Egypt; a nomarchy.
nonjoinder
The omission of some person who ought to have been made a plaintiff or defendant in a suit, or of some cause of action which ought to be joined.
nonce
The one or single occasion; the present call or purpose; -- chiefly used in the phrase for the nonce.
nomocracy
Government in accordance with a system of law.
nonability
Want of ability.
nonda
The edible plumlike fruit of the Australian tree, Parinarium Nonda.
none
No one; not one; not anything; -- frequently used also partitively, or as a plural, not any.
nonoic
Pertaining to, derived from, or resembling, nonane; as, nonoic acid, which is also called pelargonic acid.
nonmember
One who is not a member.
nonnatural
Not natural; unnatural.
nonregent
A master of arts whose regency has ceased. See Regent.
nonpareil
Something of unequaled excellence; a peerless thing or person; a nonesuch; -- often used as a name.
nonsane
Unsound; not perfect; as, a person of nonsane memory.
notch
A hollow cut in anything; a nick; an indentation.
norm
A rule or authoritative standard; a model; a type.
noological
Of or pertaining to noology.
nonyl
The hydrocarbon radical, C9H19, derived from nonane and forming many compounds. Used also adjectively; as, nonyl alcohol.
nonusance
Neglect of using; failure to use.
nonvocal
Not vocal; destitute of tone.
noodle
A simpleton; a blockhead; a stupid person; a ninny.
nook
A narrow place formed by an angle in bodies or between bodies; a corner; a recess; a secluded retreat.
nopal
A cactaceous plant (Nopalea cochinellifera), originally Mexican, on which the cochineal insect feeds, and from which it is collected.
noon
No. See the Note under No.
noose
A running knot, or loop, which binds the closer the more it is drawn.
norbertine
See Premonstrant.
norian
Pertaining to the upper portion of the Laurentian rocks.
norwegian
Of or pertaining to Norway, its inhabitants, or its language.
norroy
The most northern of the English Kings-at-arms. See King-at-arms, under King.
norna
One of the three Fates, Past, Present, and Future. Their names were Urd, Verdandi, and Skuld.
noropianic
Of, pertaining to, or designating, an acid of the aromatic series obtained from opianic acid.
norse
Of or pertaining to ancient Scandinavia, or to the language spoken by its inhabitants.
nortelry
Nurture; education; culture; bringing up.
nosocomial
Of or pertaining to a hospital; as, nosocomial atmosphere.
nose
The prominent part of the face or anterior extremity of the head containing the nostrils and olfactory cavities; the olfactory organ.
nosing
That part of the treadboard of a stair which projects over the riser; hence, any like projection, as the projecting edge of a molding.
nost
Wottest not; knowest not.
notabilia
Things worthy of notice.
nourish
To feed and cause to grow; to supply with matter which increases bulk or supplies waste, and promotes health; to furnish with nutriment.
notwheat
Wheat not bearded.
notice
The act of noting, remarking, or observing; observation by the senses or intellect; cognizance; note.
note
To butt; to push with the horns.
nothing
Not anything; no thing (in the widest sense of the word thing); -- opposed to anything and something.
notopodium
The dorsal lobe or branch of a parapodium. See Parapodium.
notself
The negative of self.
noule
The top of the head; the head or noll.
nouch
An ouch; a jewel.
nougat
A cake, sweetmeat, or confection made with almonds or other nuts.
noumenal
Of or pertaining to the noumenon; real; -- opposed to phenomenal.
noun
A word used as the designation or appellation of a creature or thing, existing in fact or in thought; a substantive.
novum
A game at dice, properly called novem quinque (L., nine five), the two principal throws being nine and five.
novaculite
A variety of siliceous slate, of which hones are made; razor stone; Turkey stone; hone stone; whet slate.
nous
Intellect; understanding; talent; -- used humorously.
nowthe
Just now; at present.
novel
Of recent origin or introduction; not ancient; new; hence, out of the ordinary course; unusual; strange; surprising.
novice
One who is new in any business, profession, or calling; one unacquainted or unskilled; one yet in the rudiments; a beginner; a tyro.
nowed
Knotted; tied in a knot, as a serpent.
nowadays
In these days; at the present time.
nowd
The European gray gurnard (Trigla gurnardus).
nowise
Not in any manner or degree; in no way; noways.
nowhere
Not anywhere; not in any place or state; as, the book is nowhere to be found.
noxious
Guilty; criminal.
nutter
A gatherer of nuts.
numb
Producing numbness; benumbing; as, the numb, cold night.
nucleate
Having a nucleus; nucleated.
nubecula
Specifically, the Magellanic clouds.
nozzle
The nose; the snout; hence, the projecting vent of anything; as, the nozzle of a bellows.
noyful
Full of annoyance.
noyous
Annoying; disagreeable.
nuance
A shade of difference; a delicate gradation.
nubbin
A small or imperfect ear of maize.
nucellus
See Nucleus, 3 (a).
nubia
A light fabric of wool, worn on the head by women; a cloud.
nucament
A catkin or ament; the flower cluster of the hazel, pine, willow, and the like.
nucha
The back or upper part of the neck; the nape.
nuciferous
Bearing, or producing, nuts.
nudibranch
Of or pertaining to the Nudibranchiata.
nuddle
To walk quickly with the head bent forward; -- often with along.
nucula
A genus of small marine bivalve shells, having a pearly interior.
nudation
The act of stripping, or making bare or naked.
nude
Bare; naked; unclothed; undraped; as, a nude statue.
nudge
To touch gently, as with the elbow, in order to call attention or convey intimation.
nugify
To render trifling or futile; to make silly.
nugacity
Futility; trifling talk or behavior; drollery.
nugget
A lump; a mass, esp. a native lump of a precious metal; as, a nugget of gold.
nuisance
That which annoys or gives trouble and vexation; that which is offensive or noxious.
null
Of no legal or binding force or validity; of no efficacy; invalid; void; nugatory; useless.
nurl
To cut with reeding or fluting on the edge of, as coins, the heads of screws, etc.; to knurl.
nunchion
A portion of food taken at or after noon, usually between full meals; a luncheon.
nummary
Of or relating to coins or money.
numerable
Capable of being numbered or counted.
numidian
Of or pertaining to ancient Numidia in Northern Africa.
numps
A dolt; a blockhead.
numskull
A dunce; a dolt; a stupid fellow.
nuphar
A genus of plants found in the fresh-water ponds or lakes of Europe, Asia, and North America; the yellow water lily.
nundinal
A nundinal letter.
nunnation
The pronunciation of n at the end of words.
nupson
A simpleton; a fool.
nuptial
Of or pertaining to marriage; done or used at a wedding; as, nuptial rites and ceremonies.
nutcracker
An instrument for cracking nuts.
nustle
To fondle; to cherish.
nurse
One who, or that which, brings up, rears, causes to grow, trains, fosters, or the like.
nurture
The act of nourishing or nursing; thender care; education; training.
nutant
Nodding; having the top bent downward.
nutbreaker
The European nuthatch.
nutlet
A small nut; also, the stone of a drupe.
nutgall
A more or less round gall resembling a nut, esp. one of those produced on the oak and used in the arts.
nuthatch
Any one of several species of birds of the genus Sitta, as the European species (Sitta Europaea). The white-breasted nuthatch (S.
nutria
The fur of the coypu. See Coypu.
nutmeg
The kernel of the fruit of the nutmeg tree (Myristica fragrans), a native of the Molucca Islands, but cultivated elsewhere in the tropics.
nutshell
The shell or hard external covering in which the kernel of a nut is inclosed.
obedience
Words or actions denoting submission to authority; dutifulness.
oarlock
The notch, fork, or other device on the gunwale of a boat, in which the oar rests in rowing.  See Rowlock.
oafish
Like an oaf; simple.
nymph
A goddess of the mountains, forests, meadows, or waters.
nuzzle
To noursle or nurse; to foster; to bring up.
nyctalops
One afflicted with nyctalopia.
nystagmus
A rapid involuntary oscillation of the eyeballs.
nyula
A species of ichneumon (Herpestes nyula). Its fur is beautifully variegated by closely set zigzag markings.
oaky
Resembling oak; strong.
oaken
Made or consisting of oaks or of the wood of oaks.
oakum
The material obtained by untwisting and picking into loose fiber old hemp ropes; -- used for calking the seams of ships, stopping leaks, etc.
oared
Furnished with oars; -- chiefly used in composition; as, a four-oared boat.
oarfish
The ribbon fish.
oaten
Consisting of an oat straw or stem; as, an oaten pipe.
oasis
A fertile or green spot in a waste or desert, esp. in a sandy desert.
oarsman
One who uses, or is skilled in the use of, an oar; a rower.
oary
Having the form or the use of an oar; as, the swan's oary feet.
oast
A kiln to dry hops or malt; a cockle.
oatcake
A cake made of oatmeal.
obconical
Conical, but having the apex downward; inversely conical.
oath
A solemn affirmation or declaration, made with a reverent appeal to God for the truth of what is affirmed.
oatmeal
Meal made of oats.
obduce
To draw over, as a covering.
obeah
Of or pertaining to obi; as, the obeah man.
obectize
To make an object of; to regard as an object; to place in the position of an object.
obfirmate
To make firm; to harden in resolution.
oberon
The king of the fairies, and husband of Titania or Queen Mab.
obeisance
A manifestation of obedience; an expression of difference or respect; homage; a bow; a courtesy.
obelion
The region of the skull between the two parietal foramina where the closure of the sagittal suture usually begins.
obese
Excessively corpulent; fat; fleshy.
obey
To give ear to; to execute the commands of; to yield submission to; to comply with the orders of.
obiyuary
Of or pertaining to the death of a person or persons; as, an obituary notice; obituary poetry.
obfuscate
Obfuscated; darkened; obscured.
obit
Death; decease; the date of one's death.
obituary
A list of the dead, or a register of anniversary days when service is performed for the dead.
object
To set before or against; to bring into opposition; to oppose.
obligable
Acknowledging, or complying with, obligation; trustworthy.
objuration
A binding by oath.
objectless
Having no object; purposeless.
objicient
One who makes objection; an objector.
oblate
Flattened or depressed at the poles; as, the earth is an oblate spheroid.
oblectate
To delight; to please greatly.
obnubilate
To cloud; to obscure.
oblocutor
A disputer; a gainsayer.
obnoxious
Subject; liable; exposed; answerable; amenable; -- with to.
obolary
Possessing only small coins; impoverished.
oboist
A performer on the oboe.
obomegoid
Obversely omegoid.
pipkin
A small earthen boiler.
oxycalcium
Of or pertaining to oxygen and calcium; as, the oxycalcium light. See Drummond light.
opodeldoc
A kind of plaster, said to have been invented by Mindererus, -- used for external injuries.
oleiferous
Producing oil; as, oleiferous seeds.
odmyl
A volatile liquid obtained by boiling sulphur with linseed oil. It has an unpleasant garlic odor.
ochre
A impure earthy ore of iron or a ferruginous clay, usually red (hematite) or yellow (limonite), -- used as a pigment in making paints, etc.
obumbrant
Overhanging; as, obumbrant feathers.
obsolesce
To become obsolescent.
obscene
Foul; fifthy; disgusting.
obreption
The act of creeping upon with secrecy or by surprise.
obrogate
To annul indirectly by enacting a new and contrary law, instead of by expressly abrogating or repealing the old one.
obsecrate
To beseech; to supplicate; to implore.
obsidian
A kind of glass produced by volcanoes. It is usually of a black color, and opaque, except in thin splinters.
obtected
Covered; protected.
obstacle
That which stands in the way, or opposes; anything that hinders progress; a hindrance; an obstruction, physical or moral.
obtain
To hold; to keep; to possess.
obtrude
To thrust impertinently; to present without warrant or solicitation; as, to obtrude one's self upon a company.
obtund
To reduce the edge, pungency, or violent action of; to dull; to blunt; to deaden; to quell; as, to obtund the acrimony of the gall.
occident
The part of the horizon where the sun last appears in the evening; that part of the earth towards the sunset; the west; -- opposed to orient.
obviate
To meet in the way.
obuncous
Hooked or crooked in an extreme degree.
obvention
The act of happening incidentally; that which happens casually; an incidental advantage; an occasional offering.
occamy
An alloy imitating gold or silver.
occecation
The act of making blind, or the state of being blind.
occult
Hidden from the eye or the understanding; inviable; secret; concealed; unknown.
occlude
To shut up; to close.
occrustate
To incrust; to harden.
ocean
The whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe; -- called also the sea, or great sea.
ocellary
Of or pertaining to ocelli.
oddity
The quality or state of being odd; singularity; queerness; peculiarity; as, oddity of dress, manners, and the like.
octoate
A salt of an octoic acid; a caprylate.
octachord
An instrument of eight strings; a system of eight tones.
ochlesis
A general morbid condition induced by the crowding together of many persons, esp. sick persons, under one roof.
ochrea
A greave or legging.
octennial
Happening every eighth year; also, lasting a period of eight years.
octic
Of the eighth degree or order.
ocular
Depending on, or perceived by, the eye; received by actual sight; personally seeing or having seen; as, ocular proof.
octroi
A privilege granted by the sovereign authority, as the exclusive right of trade granted to a guild or society; a concession.
octyl
A hypothetical hydrocarbon radical regarded as an essential residue of octane, and as entering into its derivatives; as, octyl alcohol.
ocypodian
One of a tribe of crabs which live in holes in the sand along the seashore, and run very rapidly, -- whence the name.
odalisque
A female slave or concubine in the harem of the Turkish sultan.
odic
Of or pertaining to od. See Od.
odds
Quarrel; dispute; debate; strife; -- chiefly in the phrase at odds.
oddly
In an odd manner; unevently.
oddness
The state of being odd, or not even.
odelet
A little or short ode.
odible
Fitted to excite hatred; hateful.
odist
A writer of an ode or odes.
odin
The supreme deity of the Scandinavians; -- the same as Woden, of the German tribes.
odious
Hateful; deserving or receiving hatred; as, an odious name, system, vice.
odium
Hatred; dislike; as, his conduct brought him into odium, or, brought odium upon him.
odize
To charge with od. See Od.
ogdoad
A thing made up of eight parts.
oestrian
Of or pertaining to the gadflies.
oecology
The various relations of animals and plants to one another and to the outer world.
odor
Any smell, whether fragrant or offensive; scent; perfume.
odometrous
Serving to measure distance on a road.
odonata
The division of insects that includes the dragon flies.
odyle
See Od. [Archaic].
odyssey
An epic poem attributed to Homer, which describes the return of Ulysses to Ithaca after the siege of Troy.
oelet
An eye, bud, or shoot, as of a plant; an oilet.
oedema
A swelling from effusion of watery fluid in the cellular tissue beneath the skin or mucous membrance; dropsy of the subcutaneous cellular tissue.
oeillade
A glance of the eye; an amorous look.
oenanthate
A salt of the supposed /nanthic acid.
oenocyan
The coloring matter of red wines.
offhand
Instant; ready; extemporaneous; as, an offhand speech; offhand excuses.
offend
To strike against; to attack; to assail.
offal
The rejected or waste parts of a butchered animal.
offcut
That which is cut off.
odfend
To transgress the moral or divine law; to commit a crime; to stumble; to sin.
offender
One who offends; one who violates any law, divine or human; a wrongdoer.
offscum
Removed scum; refuse; dross.
office
The company or corporation, or persons collectively, whose place of business is in an office; as, I have notified the office.
offlet
A pipe to let off water.
often
Frequently; many times; not seldom.
ofttimes
Frequently; often.
oillet
A small opening or loophole, sometimes circular, used in mediaeval fortifications.
ogre
An imaginary monster, or hideous giant of fairy tales, who lived on human beings; hence, any frightful giant; a cruel monster.
ogham
A particular kind of writing practiced by the ancient Irish, and found in inscriptions on stones, metals, etc.
ogee
A molding, the section of which is the form of the letter S, with the convex part above; cyma reversa.
ogganition
Snarling; grumbling.
ogive
The arch or rib which crosses a Gothic vault diagonally.
ogle
To view or look at with side glances, as in fondness, or with a design to attract notice.
oilcloth
Cloth treated with oil or paint, and used for marking garments, covering floors, etc.
ogrism
The character or manners of an ogre.
ogygian
Of or pertaining to Ogyges, a mythical king of ancient Attica, or to a great deluge in Attica in his days; hence, primeval; of obscure antiquity.
oiled
Covered or treated with oil; dressed with, or soaked in, oil.
oiliness
The quality of being oily.
okenite
A massive and fibrous mineral of a whitish color, chiefly hydrous silicate of lime.
oilseed
Seed from which oil is expressed, as the castor bean; also, the plant yielding such seed. See Castor bean.
oilman
One who deals in oils; formerly, one who dealt in oils and pickles.
oilnut
The buffalo nut. See Buffalo nut, under Buffalo.
oily
Consisting of oil; containing oil; having the nature or qualities of oil; unctuous; oleaginous; as, oily matter or substance.
ointment
That which serves to anoint; any soft unctuous substance used for smearing or anointing; an unguent.
oldness
The state or quality of being old; old age.
olay
Palm leaves, prepared for being written upon with a style pointed with steel.
olden
Old; ancient; as, the olden time.
olecranal
Of or pertaining to the olecranon.
olea
A genus of trees including the olive.
olefiant
Forming or producing an oil; specifically, designating a colorless gaseous hydrocarbon called ethylene.
onliness
The state of being alone.
ominate
To presage; to foreshow; to foretoken.
ology
A colloquial or humorous name for any science or branch of knowledge.
olifant
An ancient horn, made of ivory.
olfaction
The sense by which the impressions made on the olfactory organs by the odorous particles in the atmosphere are perceived.
oleograph
The form or figure assumed by a drop of oil when placed upon water or some other liquid with which it does not mix.
oleraceous
Pertaining to pot herbs; of the nature or having the qualities of herbs for cookery; esculent.
olibanum
The fragrant gum resin of various species of Boswellia; Oriental frankincense.
olidous
Having a strong, disagreeable smell; fetid.
olitory
Of or pertaining to, or produced in, a kitchen garden; used for kitchen purposes; as, olitory seeds.
oligarch
A member of an oligarchy; one of the rulers in an oligarchical government.
olio
A dish of stewed meat of different kinds.
oliva
A genus of polished marine gastropod shells, chiefly tropical, and often beautifully colored.
olla
A pot or jar having a wide mouth; a cinerary urn, especially one of baked clay.
omasum
The third division of the stomach of ruminants. See Manyplies, and Illust. under Ruminant.
olympic
Of or pertaining to Olympus, a mountain of Thessaly, fabled as the seat of the gods, or to Olympia, a small plain in Elis.
olpe
Originally, a leather flask or vessel for oils or liquids; afterward, an earthenware vase or pitcher without a spout.
olusatrum
An umbelliferous plant, the common Alexanders of Western Europe (Smyrnium Olusatrum).
omagra
Gout in the shoulder.
omahas
A tribe of Indians who inhabited the south side of the Missouri River. They are now partly civilized and occupy a reservation in Nebraska.
omelet
Eggs beaten up with a little flour, etc., and cooked in a frying pan; as, a plain omelet.
ombre
A game at cards, borrowed from the Spaniards, and usually played by three persons.
omega
The last letter of the Greek alphabet. See Alpha.
omen
To divine or to foreshow by signs or portents; to have omens or premonitions regarding; to predict; to augur; as, to omen ill of an enterprise.
omer
A Hebrew measure, the tenth of an ephah. See Ephah.
once
By limitation to the number one; for one time; not twice nor any number of times more than one.
omophagic
Eating raw flesh; using uncooked meat as food; as, omophagic feasts, rites.
ommateal
Of or pertaining to an ommateum.
omissible
Capable of being omitted; that may be omitted.
omit
To let go; to leave unmentioned; not to insert or name; to drop.
omnibus
A sheet-iron cover for articles in a leer or annealing arch, to protect them from drafts.
omohyoid
Of or pertaining to the shoulder and the hyoid bone; as, the omohyoid muscle.
onager
A military engine acting like a sling, which threw stones from a bag or wooden bucket, and was operated by machinery.
omostegite
The part of the carapace of a crustacean situated behind the cervical groove.
omphacine
Of, pertaining to, or expressed from, unripe fruit; as, omphacine oil.
onanism
Self-pollution; masturbation.
onappo
A nocturnal South American monkey (Callithrix discolor), noted for its agility; -- called also ventriloquist monkey.
oneliness
The state of being one or single.
onde
Hatred; fury; envy.
oncidium
A genus of tropical orchidaceous plants, the flower of one species of which (O. Papilio) resembles a butterfly.
oncograph
An instrument for registering the changes observable with an oncometer.
oneberry
The herb Paris. See Herb Paris, under Herb.
oneidas
A tribe of Indians formerly inhabiting the region near Oneida Lake in the State of New York, and forming part of the Five Nations.
onerary
Fitted for, or carrying, a burden.
onement
The state of being at one or reconciled.
oneness
The state of being one; singleness in number; individuality; unity.
onethe
Scarcely. See Unnethe.
oneself
A reflexive form of the indefinite pronoun one. Commonly writen as two words, one's self.
ongoing
The act of going forward; progress; (pl.) affairs; business; current events.
oorial
A wild, bearded sheep inhabiting the Ladakh mountains. It is reddish brown, with a dark beard from the chin to the chest.
onus
A burden; an obligation.
onondagas
A tribe of Indians formerly inhabiting what is now a part of the State of New York. They were the central or head tribe of the Five Nations.
onocerin
A white crystalline waxy substance extracted from the root of the leguminous plant Ononis spinosa.
onloft
Aloft; above ground.
only
One alone; single; as, the only man present; his only occupation.
onology
Foolish discourse.
onomancy
Divination by the letters of a name; nomancy.
onslaught
An attack; an onset; esp., a furious or murderous attack or assault.
onrush
A rushing onward.
onset
A rushing or setting upon; an attack; an assault; a storming; especially, the assault of an army.
onstead
A single farmhouse; a steading.
onto
On the top of; upon; on. See On to, under On, prep.
ooidal
Shaped like an egg.
ooecium
One of the special zooids, or cells, of Bryozoa, destined to receive and develop ova; an ovicell. See Bryozoa.
onward
Moving in a forward direction; tending toward a contemplated or desirable end; forward; as, an onward course, progress, etc.
onycha
An ingredient of the Mosaic incense, probably the operculum of some kind of strombus.
oogenesis
The development, or mode of origin, of the ova.
oogonium
A special cell in certain cryptogamous plants containing oospheres, as in the rockweeds (Fucus), and the orders Vaucherieae and Peronosporeae.
oomiak
A long, broad boat used by the Eskimos.
oolitic
Of or pertaining to oolite; composed of, or resembling, oolite.
oological
Of or pertaining to oology.
oopak
A kind of black tea.
oophoric
Having the nature of, or belonging to, an oophore.
open
Free or cleared of obstruction to progress or to view; accessible; as, an open tract; the open sea.
ooze
Soft mud or slime; earth so wet as to flow gently, or easily yield to pressure.
ootheca
An egg case, especially those of many kinds of mollusks, and of some insects, as the cockroach.  Cf. Ooecium.
oosperm
The ovum, after fusion with the spermatozoon in impregnation.
oostegite
One of the plates which in some Crustacea inclose a cavity wherein the eggs are hatched.
ootocoid
A half oviparous, or an oviparous, mammal; a marsupial or monotreme.
ootype
The part of the oviduct of certain trematode worms in which the ova are completed and furnished with a shell.
opal
A mineral consisting, like quartz, of silica, but inferior to quartz in hardness and specific gravity.
oozy
Miry; containing soft mud; resembling ooze; as, the oozy bed of a river.
opacate
To darken; to cloud.
opaque
Impervious to the rays of light; not transparent; as, an opaque substance.
opelet
A bright-colored European actinian (Anemonia, / Anthea, sulcata); -- so called because it does not retract its tentacles.
ophryon
The supraorbital point.
opercular
The principal opercular bone or operculum of fishes.
opera
The score of a musical drama, either written or in print; a play set to music.
oparcular
Of, pertaining to, or like, an operculum.
opetide
Open time; -- applied to different things
ophidia
The order of reptiles which includes the serpents.
opificer
An artificer; a workman.
ophthalmia
An inflammation of the membranes or coats of the eye or of the eyeball.
opianic
Of, pertaining to, or designating, an organic acid obtained by the oxidation of narcotine.
opisometer
An instrument with a revolving wheel for measuring a curved line, as on a map.
opinable
Capable of being opined or thought.
opium
The inspissated juice of the Papaver somniferum, or white poppy.
otheoscope
An instrument for exhibiting the repulsive action produced by light or heat in an exhausted vessel; a modification of the radoimeter.
oriole
 Any one of various species of Old World singing birds of the family Oriolidae. They are usually conspicuously colored with yellow and black.
orbical
Spherical; orbicular; orblike; circular.
opulence
Wealth; riches; affluence.
oppugn
To fight against; to attack; to be in conflict with; to oppose; to resist.
oppleted
Filled; crowded.
opossum
Any American marsupial of the genera Didelphys and Chironectes. The common species of the United States is Didelphys Virginiana.
oppidan
Of or pertaining to a town.
opponency
The act of opening an academical disputation; the proposition of objections to a tenet, as an exercise for a degree.
oppress
To impose excessive burdens upon; to overload; hence, to treat with unjust rigor or with cruelty.
optable
That may be chosen; desirable.
opsimathy
Education late in life.
opsonation
A catering; a buying of provisions.
optic
The organ of sight; an eye.
optocoelia
The cavity of one of the optic lobes of the brain in many animals.
oral
Uttered by the mouth, or in words; spoken, not written; verbal; as, oral traditions; oral testimony; oral law.
oquassa
A small, handsome trout (Salvelinus oquassa), found in some of the lakes in Maine; -- called also blueback trout.
opuntia
A genus of cactaceous plants; the prickly pear, or Indian fig.
opus
A work; specif. (Mus.), a musical composition.
orabassu
A South American monkey of the genus Callithrix, esp.
orache
A genus (Atriplex) of herbs or low shrubs of the Goosefoot family, most of them with a mealy surface.
oration
To deliver an oration.
orang
See Orang-outang.
orarian
Of or pertaining to a coast.
orbate
Bereaved; fatherless; childless.
orbed
Having the form of an orb; round.
oread
One of the nymphs of mountains and grottoes.
orcin
A colorless crystalline substance, C6H3.CH3.(OH)2, which is obtained from certain lichens (Roccella, Lecanora, etc.
orcadian
Of or pertaining to the Orkney Islands.
orbulina
A genus of minute living Foraminifera having a globular shell.
orby
Orblike; having the course of an orb; revolving.
orcein
A reddish brown amorphous dyestuff, /, obtained from orcin, and forming the essential coloring matter of cudbear and archil.
orcharding
The cultivation of orchards.
ordinable
Capable of being ordained or appointed.
ordain
To set in order; to arrange according to rule; to regulate; to set; to establish.
ordeal
Any severe trial, or test; a painful experience.
ordonnance
The disposition of the parts of any composition with regard to one another and the whole.
ordure
Dung; excrement; faeces.
organ
A component part performing an essential office in the working of any complex machine; as, the cylinder, valves, crank, etc.
orfe
A bright-colored domesticated variety of the id. See Id.
orectic
Of or pertaining to the desires; hence, impelling to gratification; appetitive.
oreodont
Resembling, or allied to, the genus Oreodon.
orfgild
Restitution for cattle; a penalty for taking away cattle.
orfrays
See Orphrey. [Obs.] Rom. of R.
oriel
A gallery for minstrels.
orgiastic
Pertaining to, or of the nature of, orgies.
orgy
A frantic revel; drunken revelry. See Orgies
origanum
A genus of aromatic labiate plants, including the sweet marjoram (O. Marjorana) and the wild marjoram (O.
orifice
A mouth or aperture, as of a tube, pipe, etc.; an opening; as, the orifice of an artery or vein; the orifice of a wound.
orillon
A semicircular projection made at the shoulder of a bastion for the purpose of covering the retired flank, -- found in old fortresses.
orvietan
A kind of antidote for poisons; a counter poison formerly in vogue.
orological
Of or pertaining to orology.
ormuzd
The good principle, or being, of the ancient Persian religion. See Ahriman.
orle
A bearing, in the form of a fillet, round the shield, within, but at some distance from, the border.
oriskany
Designating, or pertaining to, certain beds, chiefly limestone, characteristic of the latest period of the Silurian age.
orkneyan
Of or pertaining to the Orkney islands.
orlo
A wind instrument of music in use among the Spaniards.
ormolu
A variety of brass made to resemble gold by the use of less zinc and more copper in its composition than ordinary brass contains.
orography
That branch of science which treats of mountains and mountain systems; orology; as, the orography of Western Europe.
ornament
That which embellishes or adorns; that which adds grace or beauty; embellishment; decoration; adornment.
ornithic
Of or pertaining to birds; as, ornithic fossils.
orohippus
A genus of American Eocene mammals allied to the horse, but having four toes in front and three behind.
oroide
An alloy, chiefly of copper and zinc or tin, resembling gold in color and brilliancy.
orsedue
Leaf metal of bronze; Dutch metal. See under Dutch.
orpin
A yellow pigment of various degrees of intensity, approaching also to red.
orotund
Characterized by fullness, clearness, strength, and smoothness; ringing and musical; -- said of the voice or manner of utterance.
orphan
A child bereaved of both father and mother; sometimes, also, a child who has but one parent living.
orrery
An apparatus which illustrates, by the revolution of balls moved by wheelwork, the relative size, periodic motions, positions, orbits, etc.
orris
A plant of the genus Iris (I. Florentina); a kind of flower-de-luce. Its rootstock has an odor resembling that of violets.
ortolan
A European singing bird (Emberiza hortulana), about the size of the lark, with black wings. It is esteemed delicious food when fattened.
orthid
A brachiopod shell of the genus Orthis, and allied genera, of the family Orthidae.
ortive
Of or relating to the time or act of rising; eastern; as, the ortive amplitude of a planet.
ortygan
One of several species of East Indian birds of the genera Ortygis and Hemipodius.  They resemble quails, but lack the hind toe.
orval
A kind of sage (Salvia Horminum).
osnaburg
A species of coarse linen, originally made in Osnaburg, Germany.
oscillancy
The state of oscillating; a seesaw kind of motion.
oryza
A genus of grasses including the rice plant; rice.
oryctology
An old name for paleontology.
oryx
A genus of African antelopes which includes the gemsbok, the leucoryx, the bisa antelope (O. beisa), and the beatrix antelope (O.
osages
A tribe of southern Sioux Indians, now living in the Indian Territory.
oscan
Of or pertaining to the Osci, a primitive people of Campania, a province of ancient Italy.
osmanli
A Turkish official; one of the dominant tribe of Turks; loosely, any Turk.
osculant
Kissing; hence, meeting; clinging.
osier
A kind of willow (Salix viminalis) growing in wet places in Europe and Asia, and introduced into North America.
osmiamate
A salt of osmiamic acid.
osmometer
An instrument for measuring the amount of osmotic action in different liquids.
ostiary
The mouth of a river; an estuary.
ossianic
Of or pertaining to, or characteristic of, Ossian, a legendary Erse or Celtic bard.
osphradium
The olfactory organ of some Mollusca. It is connected with the organ of respiration.
osse
A prophetic or ominous utterance.
ossuarium
A charnel house; an ossuary.
osteitis
Inflammation of bone.
ostosis
Bone formation; ossification. See Ectostosis, and Endostosis.
ostleress
A female ostler.
ostmen
East men; Danish settlers in Ireland, formerly so called.
otacoustic
Assisting the sense of hearing; as, an otacoustic instrument.
ostracea
A division of bivalve mollusks including the oysters and allied shells.
otalgia
Pain in the ear; earache.
ovate
Shaped like an egg, with the lower extremity broadest.
oust
To take away; to remove.
ottoman
Of or pertaining to the Turks; as, the Ottoman power or empire.
otography
A description of the ear.
otis
A genus of birds including the bustards.
otic
Of, pertaining to, or in the region of, the ear; auricular; auditory.
otiose
Being at leisure or ease; unemployed; indolent; idle.
otitis
Inflammation of the ear.
otoconite
A mass of otoliths.
otoscope
An instrument for examining the condition of the ear.
otolitic
Of or pertaining to otoliths.
otopathy
A diseased condition of the ear.
otozoum
An extinct genus of huge vertebrates, probably dinosaurs, known only from four-toed tracks in Triassic sandstones.
otter
The larva of the ghost moth. It is very injurious to hop vines.
ounce
A weight, the sixteenth part of a pound avoirdupois, and containing 437/ grains.
ouarine
A Brazilian monkey of the genus Mycetes.
ottrelite
A micaceous mineral occurring in small scales. It is characteristic of certain crystalline schists.
ouakari
Any South American monkey of the genus Brachyurus, especially B. ouakari.
ouch
A socket or bezel holding a precious stone; hence, a jewel or ornament worn on the person.
ought
Was or were under obligation to pay; owed.
ourang
The orang-outang.
oundy
Wavy; waving/ curly.
ouphe
A fairy; a goblin; an elf.
ourebi
A small, graceful, and swift African antelope, allied to the klipspringer.
ours
See Note under Our.
outlabor
To surpass in laboring.
outface
To face or look (one) out of countenance; to resist or bear down by bold looks or effrontery; to brave.
outcant
To surpass in canting.
outact
To do or beyond; to exceed in acting.
outbabble
To utter foolishly or excessively; to surpass in babbling.
outdare
To surpass in daring; to overcome by courage; to brave.
outer
The part of a target which is beyond the circles surrounding the bull's-eye.
outing
The act of going out; an airing; an excursion; as, a summer outing.
outgaze
To gaze beyond; to exceed in sharpness or persistence of seeing or of looking; hence, to stare out of countenance.
outhaul
A rope used for hauling out a sail upon a spar; -- opposite of inhaul.
outjest
To surpass in jesting; to drive out, or away, by jesting.
outkeeper
An attachment to a surveyor's compass for keeping tally in chaining.
outsail
To excel, or to leave behind, in sailing; to sail faster than.
outpace
To outgo; to move faster than; to leave behind.
outmantle
To excel in mantling; hence, to excel in splendor, as of dress.
outname
To exceed in naming or describing.
outquench
To quench entirely; to extinguish.
outrage
To rage in excess of.
outwalk
To excel in walking; to leave behind in walking.
outtaken
Or prep. Excepted; save.
outvalue
To exceed in value.
oval
Of or pertaining to eggs; done in the egg, or inception; as, oval conceptions.
outzany
To exceed in buffoonery.
ovarial
Of or pertaining to an ovary.
owllight
Glimmering or imperfect light.
ovipara
An artifical division of vertebrates, including those that lay eggs; -- opposed to Vivipara.
ovioular
Of or pertaining to an egg.
overfill
To fill to excess; to surcharge.
ovenbird
In the United States, Seiurus aurocapillus; -- called also golden-crowned thrush.
over
Above; -- implying superiority in excellence, dignity, condition, or value; as, the advantages which the Christian world has over the heathen.
overfish
To fish to excess.
ovicapsule
The outer layer of a Graafian follicle.
oviform
Having the form or figure of an egg; egg-shaped; as, an oviform leaf.
ovicyst
The pouch in which incubation takes place in some Tunicata.
ovidian
Of or pertaining to the Latin poet Ovid; resembling the style of Ovid.
ovigerons
Bearing eggs; oviferous.
ovine
Of or pertaining to sheep; consisting of sheep.
ovular
Relating or belonging to an ovule; as, an ovular growth.
ovoidal
Resembling an egg in shape; egg-shaped; ovate; as, an ovoidal apple.
ovisac
A Graafian follicle; any sac containing an ovum or ova.
ovococcus
A germinal vesicle.
ovolo
A round, convex molding. See Illust. of Column.
ovotesttis
An organ which produces both ova and spermatozoids; an hermaphrodite gland.
owing
Had or held under obligation of paying; due.
ovum
One of the series of egg-shaped ornaments into which the ovolo is often carved.
owelty
Equality; -- sometimes written ovelty and ovealty.
owler
One who owls; esp., one who conveys contraband goods. See Owling, n.
owling
The offense of transporting wool or sheep out of England contrary to the statute formerly existing.
oxhead
Literally, the head of an ox (emblem of cuckoldom); hence, a dolt; a blockhead.
oxbane
A poisonous bulbous plant (Buphane toxicaria) of the Cape of Good Hope.
oxalantin
A white crystalline nitrogenous substance (C6H4N4O5)  obtained by the reduction of parabanic acid; -- called also leucoturic acid.
owner
One who owns; a rightful proprietor; one who has the legal or rightful title, whether he is the possessor or not.
owser
Tanner's ooze. See Ooze, 3.
oxamate
A salt of oxamic acid.
oxanilate
A salt of oxanilic acid.
oxfly
The gadfly of cattle.
oxbird
 The sanderling.
oxeye
The oxeye daisy. See under Daisy.
oxford
Of or pertaining to the city or university of Oxford, England.
oxgoad
A goad for driving oxen.
oxlike
Characteristic of, or like, an ox.
oxime
One of a series of isonitroso derivatives obtained by the action of hydroxylamine on aldehydes or ketones.
oxhide
The skin of an ox, or leather made from it.
oxidable
Capable of being converted into an oxide.
oxindol
A white crystalline nitrogenous substance (C8H7NO) of the indol group, obtained by the reduction of dioxindol.
oxiodic
Pertaining to, or designating, certain compounds of iodine and oxygen.
oxshoe
A shoe for oxen, consisting of a flat piece of iron nailed to the hoof.
oxonate
A salt of oxonic acid.
oxpecker
An African bird of the genus Buphaga; the beefeater.
oxyacetic
Hydroxyacetic; designating an acid called also glycolic acid.
oxter
The armpit; also, the arm.
oxybenzene
Hydroxy benzene. Same as Phenol.
pelf
Money; riches; lucre; gain; -- generally conveying the idea of something ill-gotten or worthless. It has no plural.
parfay
By my faith; verily.
paid
Receiving pay; compensated; hired; as, a paid attorney.
pacfier
One who pacifies.
ozena
A discharge of fetid matter from the nostril, particularly if associated with ulceration of the soft parts and disease of the bones of the nose.
oxyrhyncha
The maioid crabs.
oxyntic
Acid; producing acid; -applied especially to certain glands and cells in the stomach.
oxygen
Chlorine used in bleaching.
oxymel
A mixture of honey, water, vinegar, and spice, boiled to a sirup.
oxyopy
Excessive acuteness of sight.
oxyphenic
Pertaining to, or designating, the phenol formerly called oxyphenic acid, and now oxyphenol and pyrocatechin.
oyer
A hearing or an inspection, as of a deed, bond, etc., as when a defendant in court prays oyer of a writing.
oxysalt
A salt of an oxyacid, as a sulphate.
oxytocic
Promoting uterine contractions, or parturition.
oyez
Hear; attend; -- a term used by criers of courts to secure silence before making a proclamation. It is repeated three times.
oyster
A name popularly given to the delicate morsel contained in a small cavity of the bone on each side of the lower part of the back of a fowl.
pacane
A species of hickory. See Pecan.
paage
A toll for passage over another person's grounds.
ozocerite
A waxlike mineral resin; -- sometimes called native paraffin, and mineral wax.
ozonation
The act of treating with ozone; also, the act of converting into, or producing, ozone; ozonization.
paas
The Easter festival.
pabular
Of, pertaining to, or fit for, pabulum or food; affording food.
parchesi
A game, somewhat resembling backgammon, originating in India.
pace
A single movement from one foot to the other in walking; a step.
pachacamac
A divinity worshiped by the ancient Peruvians as the creator of the universe.
pachometer
An instrument for measuring thickness, as of the glass of a mirror, or of paper; a pachymeter.
pacifiable
Capable of being pacified or appeased; placable.
padow
A paddock, or toad.
padar
Groats; coarse flour or meal.
pacos
An earthy-looking ore, consisting of brown oxide of iron with minute particles of native silver.
pacinian
Of, pertaining to, or discovered by, Filippo Pacini, an Italian physician of the 19th century.
pack
A bundle made up and prepared to be carried; especially, a bundle to be carried on the back; a load for an animal; a bale, as of goods.
pact
An agreement; a league; a compact; a covenant.
pacu
A South American freah-water fish (Myleies pacu), of the family Characinidae. It is highly esteemed as food.
padge
The barn owl; -- called also pudge, and pudge owl.
padder
One who, or that which, pads.
padelion
A plant with pedately lobed leaves; the lady's mantle.
padishah
Chief ruler; monarch; sovereign; -- a title of the Sultan of Turkey, and of the Shah of Persia.
padlock
Fig.: A curb; a restraint.
page
A contrivance, as a band, pin, snap, or the like, to hold the skirt of a woman's dress from the ground.
paean
An ancient Greek hymn in honor of Apollo as a healing deity, and, later, a song addressed to other deities.
padrone
A patron; a protector.
paduasoy
A rich and heavy silk stuff.
paeon
A foot of four syllables, one long and three short, admitting of four combinations, according to the place of the long syllable.
pagan
One who worships false gods; an idolater; a heathen; one who is neither a Christian, a Mohammedan, nor a Jew.
paguma
Any one of several species of East Indian viverrine mammals of the genus Paguma. They resemble a weasel in form.
pagina
The surface of a leaf or of a flattened thallus.
pagod
A pagoda. [R.] "Or some queer pagod."
pahi
A large war canoe of the Society Islands.
pahoehoe
A name given in the Sandwich Islands to lava having a relatively smooth surface, in distinction from the rough-surfaced lava, called a-a.
panful
Enough to fill a pan.
pallet
A wooden implement used by potters, crucible makers, etc., for forming, beating, and rounding their works.
palace
The official residence of a bishop or other distinguished personage.
pain
Punishment suffered or denounced; suffering or evil inflicted as a punishment for crime, or connected with the commission of a crime; penalty.
paigle
A species of Primula, either the cowslip or the primrose.
pail
A vessel of wood or tin, etc., usually cylindrical and having a bail, -- used esp. for carrying liquids, as water or milk, etc.
pair
A number of things resembling one another, or belonging together; a set; as, a pair or flight of stairs.
pais
The country; the people of the neighborhood.
paliform
Resembling a palus; as, the paliform lobes of the septa in corals.
pale
Wanting in color; not ruddy; dusky white; pallid; wan; as, a pale face; a pale red; a pale blue.
palfrey
A saddle horse for the road, or for state occasions, as distinguished from a war horse.
pall
An outer garment; a cloak mantle.
palet
A perpendicular band upon an escutcheon, one half the breadth of the pale.
paly
Pale; wanting color; dim.
palsgrave
A count or earl who presided in the domestic court, and had the superintendence, of a royal household in Germany.
palm
The inner and somewhat concave part of the hand between the bases of the fingers and the wrist.
palp
To have a distinct touch or feeling of; to feel.
palter
To act in insincere or deceitful manner; to play false; to equivocate; to shift; to dodge; to trifle.
paludal
Of or pertaining to marshes or fens; marshy.
pancake
A thin cake of batter fried in a pan or on a griddle; a griddlecake; a flapjack.
pamper
To feed to the full; to feed luxuriously; to glut; as, to pamper the body or the appetite.
panacea
A remedy for all diseases; a universal medicine; a cure-all; catholicon; hence, a relief or solace for affliction.
panda
A small Asiatic mammal (Ailurus fulgens) having fine soft fur. It is related to the bears, and inhabits the mountains of Northern India.
pane
The narrow edge of a hammer head. See Peen.
pape
A spiritual father; specifically, the pope.
pant
To breathe quickly or in a labored manner, as after exertion or from eagerness or excitement; to respire with heaving of the breast; to gasp.
pannade
The curvet of a horse.
pang
A paroxysm of extreme pain or anguish; a sudden and transitory agony; a throe; as, the pangs of death.
panic
A plant of the genus Panicum; panic grass; also, the edible grain of some species of panic grass.
panoistic
Producing ova only; -- said of the ovaries of certain insects which do not produce vitelligenous cells.
panshon
An earthen vessel wider at the top than at the bottom, -- used for holding milk and for various other purposes.
paolo
An old Italian silver coin, worth about ten cents.
panurgic
Skilled in all kinds of work.
panzoism
A term used to denote all of the elements or factors which constitute vitality or vital energy.
papa
A child's word for father.
papboat
A kind of sauce boat or dish.
papyrean
Of or pertaining to papyrus, or to paper; papyraceous.
papoose
A babe or young child of Indian parentage in North America.
paphian
Of or pertaining to Paphos, an ancient city of Cyprus, having a celebrated temple of Venus; hence, pertaining to Venus, or her rites.
papilio
A genus of butterflies.
pappiform
Resembling the pappus of composite plants.
papuan
Of or pertaining to Papua.
parboil
To boil or cook thoroughly.
paque
See Pasch and Easter.
para
A piece of Turkish money, usually copper, the fortieth part of a piaster, or about one ninth of a cent.
pard
A leopard; a panther.
parcae
The Fates. See Fate, 4.
pare
To cut off, or shave off, the superficial substance or extremities of; as, to pare an apple; to pare a horse's hoof.
pawn
See Pan, the masticatory.
patch
A piece of cloth, or other suitable material, sewed or otherwise fixed upon a garment to repair or strengthen it, esp.
parrel
The rope or collar by which a yard or spar is held to the mast in such a way that it may be hoisted or lowered at pleasure.
parmesan
Of or pertaining to Parma in Italy.
pariah
One of an aboriginal people of Southern India, regarded by the four castes of the Hindoos as of very low grade.
pargasite
A dark green aluminous variety of amphibole, or hornblende.
parhelic
Of or pertaining to parhelia.
park
A piece of ground inclosed, and stored with beasts of the chase, which a man may have by prescription, or the king's grant.
parlance
Conversation; discourse; talk; diction; phrase; as, in legal parlance; in common parlance.
parqueted
Formed in parquetry; inlaid with wood in small and differently colored figures.
parnassia
A genus of herbs growing in wet places, and having white flowers; grass of Parnassus.
parochial
Of or pertaining to a parish; restricted to a parish; as, parochial duties.
parr
A young salmon in the stage when it has dark transverse bands; -- called also samlet, skegger, and fingerling.
parakeet
Any one of numerous species of small parrots having a graduated tail, which is frequently very long; -- called also paroquet and paraquet.
pash
To strike; to crush; to smash; to dash in pieces.
parvenu
An upstart; a man newly risen into notice.
parsee
One of the adherents of the Zoroastrian or ancient Persian religion, descended from Persian refugees settled in India; a fire worshiper; a Gheber.
part
A constituent portion of a living or spiritual whole; a member; an organ; an essential element.
pascha
The passover; the feast of Easter.
paseng
The wild or bezoar goat. See Goat.
pass
To go by or glide by, as time; to elapse; to be spent; as, their vacation passed pleasantly.
pasigraphy
A system of universal writing, or a manner of writing that may be understood and used by all nations.
pasquilant
A lampooner; a pasquiler.
past
Of or pertaining to a former time or state; neither present nor future; gone by; elapsed; ended; spent; as, past troubles; past offences.
pataca
The Spanish dollar; -- called also patacoon.
pauhaugen
The menhaden; -- called also poghaden.
patois
A dialect peculiar to the illiterate classes; a provincial form of speech.
patible
Sufferable; tolerable; endurable.
pate
A pie. See Patty.
path
A trodden way; a footway.
patly
Fitly; seasonably.
patness
Fitness or appropriateness; striking suitableness; convenience.
patulous
Open; expanded; slightly spreading; having the parts loose or dispersed; as, a patulous calyx; a patulous cluster of flowers.
patrial
Derived from the name of a country, and designating an inhabitant of the country; gentile; -- said of a noun.
pattee
Narrow at the inner, and very broad at the other, end, or having its arms of that shape; -- said of a cross.
pauciloquy
Brevity in speech.
paugy
The scup. See Porgy, and Scup.
pause
A temporary stop or rest; an intermission of action; interruption; suspension; cessation.
paunch
The belly and its contents; the abdomen; also, the first stomach, or rumen, of ruminants. See Rumen.
paul
An Italian silver coin. See Paolo.
paum
To palm off by fraud; to cheat at cards.
pauper
A poor person; especially, one development on private or public charity. Also used adjectively; as, pouper immigrants, pouper labor.
pauropoda
An order of small myriapods having only nine pairs of legs and destitute of tracheae.
paviage
A contribution or a tax for paving streets or highways.
pauxi
A curassow (Ourax pauxi), which, in South America, is often domesticated.
pave
Fig.: To make smooth, easy, and safe; to prepare, as a path or way; as, to pave the way to promotion; to pave the way for an enterprise.
pawk
A small lobster.
pavo
A genus of birds, including the peacocks.
pawl
To stop with a pawl; to drop the pawls off.
pectate
A salt of pectic acid.
peak
A point; the sharp end or top of anything that terminates in a point; as, the peak, or front, of a cap.
paytine
An alkaloid obtained from a white bark resembling that of the cinchona, first brought from Payta, in Peru.
payer
One who pays; specifically, the person by whom a bill or note has been, or should be, paid.
paxillose
Resembling a little stake.
payable
That may, can, or should be paid; suitable to be paid; justly due.
payment
The act of paying, or giving compensation; the discharge of a debt or an obligation.
payndemain
The finest and whitest bread made in the Middle Ages; -- called also paynemain, payman.
peafowl
The peacock or peahen; any species of Pavo.
peabird
The wryneck; -- so called from its note.
peace
A state of quiet or tranquillity; freedom from disturbance or agitation; calm; repose
peagrit
A coarse pisolitic limestone. See Pisolite.
peahen
The hen or female peafowl.
peba
An armadillo (Tatusia novemcincta) which is found from Texas to Paraguay; -- called also tatouhou.
pearl
A fringe or border.
peal
A small salmon; a grilse; a sewin.
pean
One of the furs, the ground being sable, and the spots or tufts or.
peasant
A countryman; a rustic; especially, one of the lowest class of tillers of the soil in European countries.
peat
A small person; a pet; -- sometimes used contemptuously.
peccable
Liable to sin; subject to transgress the divine law.
pebble
A small roundish stone or bowlder; especially, a stone worn and rounded by the action of water; a pebblestone.
pebrine
An epidemic disease of the silkworm, characterized by the presence of minute vibratory corpuscles in the blood.
peck
The fourth part of a bushel; a dry measure of eight quarts; as, a peck of wheat.
pecopteris
An extensive genus of fossil ferns; -- so named from the regular comblike arrangement of the leaflets.
peer
To come in sight; to appear.
pedomancy
Divination by examining the soles of the feet.
peddle
To do a small business; to be busy about trifles; to piddle.
peculate
To appropriate to one's own use the property of the public; to steal public moneys intrusted to one's care; to embezzle.
pedage
A toll or tax paid by passengers, entitling them to safe-conduct and protection.
pederast
One guilty of pederasty; a sodomite.
pedial
Pertaining to the foot, or to any organ called a foot; pedal.
peel
A small tower, fort, or castle; a keep.
peduncle
The stem or stalk that supports the flower or fruit of a plant, or a cluster of flowers or fruits.
peek
To look slyly, or with the eyes half closed, or through a crevice; to peep.
peen
A round-edged, or hemispherical, end to the head of a hammer or sledge, used to stretch or bend metal by indentation.
peep
To cry, as a chicken hatching or newly hatched; to chirp; to cheep.
pegomancy
Divination by fountains.
pegger
One who fastens with pegs.
peevish
Habitually fretful; easily vexed or fretted; hard to please; apt to complain; querulous; petulant.
pegador
A species of remora (Echeneis naucrates). See Remora.
pegm
A sort of moving machine employed in the old pageants.
pegtatoid
Resembling pegmatite; pegmatic.
pejorative
Implying or imputing evil; depreciatory; disparaging; unfavorable.
peirameter
A dynamometer for measuring the force required to draw wheel carriages on roads of different constructions.
peise
A weight; a poise.
pela
See Wax insect, under Wax.
pekoe
A kind of black tea.
pelerine
A woman's cape; especially, a fur cape that is longer in front than behind.
phitoness
Pythoness; witch.
pern
To take profit of; to make profitable.
pinocle
A game at cards, played with forty-eight cards, being all the cards above the eight spots in two packs.
pend
Oil cake; penock.
peludo
The South American hairy armadillo (Dasypus villosus).
pelma
The under surface of the foot.
pelican
A retort or still having a curved tube or tubes leading back from the head to the body for continuous condensation and redistillation.
pell
To pelt; to knock about.
pelopium
A supposed new metal found in columbite, afterwards shown to be identical with columbium, or niobium.
pelt
The skin of a beast with the hair on; a raw or undressed hide; a skin preserved with the hairy or woolly covering on it.
pemphigus
A somewhat rare skin disease, characterized by the development of blebs upon different part of the body.
pelvic
Of, pertaining to, or in the region of, the pelvis; as, pelvic cellulitis.
pemmican
Among the North American Indians, meat cut in thin slices, divested of fat, and dried in the sun.
penal
Of or pertaining to punishment, to penalties, or to crimes and offenses; pertaining to criminal jurisprudence
pence
Pl. of Penny. See Penny.
penman
One who uses the pen; a writer; esp., one skilled in the use of the pen; a calligrapher; a writing master.
penholder
A handle for a pen.
penelope
A genus of curassows, including the guans.
penguinery
A breeding place, or rookery, of penguins.
penible
Painstaking; assidous.
penk
A minnow. See Pink, n., 4.
penrack
A rack for pens not in use.
penna
A perfect, or normal, feather.
penologist
One versed in, or a student of, penology.
pensile
Hanging; suspended; pendent; pendulous.
pent
Penned or shut up; confined; -- often with up.
pequots
A tribe of Indians who formerly inhabited Eastern Connecticut.
peperino
A volcanic rock, formed by the cementing together of sand, scoria, cinders, etc.
peon
A foot soldier; a policeman; also, an office attendant; a messenger.
penult
The last syllable but one of a word; the syllable preceding the final one.
penwiper
A cloth, or other material, for wiping off or cleaning ink from a pen.
people
The body of persons who compose a community, tribe, nation, or race; an aggregate of individuals forming a whole; a community; a nation.
peorias
An Algonquin tribe of Indians who formerly inhabited a part of Illinois.
pepper
A well-known, pungently aromatic condiment, the dried berry, either whole or powdered, of the Piper nigrum.
peplis
A genus of plants including water purslane.
pepo
Any fleshy fruit with a firm rind, as a pumpkin, melon, or gourd. See Gourd.
pepsinogen
The antecedent of the ferment pepsin. A substance contained in the form of granules in the peptic cells of the gastric glands.
peptic
Relating to digestion; promoting digestion; digestive; as, peptic sauces.
perfect
Well informed; certain; sure.
perca
A genus of fishes, including the fresh-water perch.
peract
To go through with; to perform.
perbromate
A salt of perbromic acid.
perdicine
Of or pertaining to the family Perdicidae, or partridges.
peregrine
Foreign; not native; extrinsic or from without; exotic.
perjure
To make a false oath to; to deceive by oaths and protestations.
perhaps
By chance; peradventure; perchance; it may be.
perianth
The leaves of a flower generally, especially when the calyx and corolla are not readily distinguished.
perlaceous
Pearly; resembling pearl.
perk
To make trim or smart; to straighten up; to erect; to make a jaunty or saucy display of; as, to perk the ears; to perk up one's head.
permanable
Permanent; durable.
peucil
A liquid resembling camphene, obtained by treating turpentine hydrochloride with lime.
peshitto
The earliest Syriac version of the Old Testament, translated from Hebrew; also, the incomplete Syriac version of the New Testament.
pert
Open; evident; apert.
perquisite
Things gotten by a man's own industry, or purchased with his own money, as opposed to things which come to him by descent.
perofskite
A titanate of lime occurring in octahedral or cubic crystals.
perpend
To weight carefully in the mind.
perradial
Situated around the radii, or radial tubes, of a radiate.
pers
Light blue; grayish blue; -- a term applied to different shades at different periods.
pery
A pear tree. See Pirie.
peruke
A wig; a periwig.
pervade
To pass or flow through, as an aperture, pore, or interstice; to permeate.
pesade
The motion of a horse when, raising his fore quarters, he keeps his hind feet on the ground without advancing; rearing.
peseta
A Spanish silver coin, and money of account, equal to about nineteen cents, and divided into 100 centesimos.
petechiae
Small crimson, purple, or livid spots, like flea-bites, due to extravasation of blood, which appear on the skin in malignant fevers, etc.
pessary
An instrument or device to be introduced into and worn in the vagina, to support the uterus, or remedy a malposition.
pesky
Pestering; vexatious; troublesome. Used also as an intensive.
peso
A Spanish dollar; also, an Argentine, Chilian, Colombian, etc., coin, equal to from 75 cents to a dollar; also, a pound weight.
pest
A fatal epidemic disease; a pestilence; specif., the plague.
petal
One of the leaves of the corolla, or the colored leaves of a flower. See Corolla, and Illust. of Flower.
petticoat
A loose under-garment worn by women, and covering the body below the waist.
petiolated
Having a stalk or petiole; as, a petioleate leaf; the petiolated abdomen of certain Hymenoptera.
petrary
An ancient war engine for hurling stones.
petulancy
The quality or state of being petulant; temporary peevishness; pettishness; capricious ill humor.
petzite
A telluride of silver and gold, related to hessite.
phalaena
A linnaean genus which included the moths in general.
peziza
A genus of fungi embracing a great number of species, some of which are remarkable for their regular cuplike form and deep colors.
pewit
The European black-headed, or laughing, gull (Xema ridibundus). See under Laughing.
pewee
A common American tyrant flycatcher (Sayornis phoebe, or S. fuscus). Called also pewit, and phoebe.
pewfellow
One who occupies the same pew with another.
pewter
Utensils or vessels made of pewter, as dishes, porringers, drinking vessels, tankards, pots.
peytrel
The breastplate of a horse's armor or harness. [Spelt also peitrel.] See Poitrel.
phaeacian
Of or pertaining to the Phaeacians, a fabulous seafaring people fond of the feast, the lyre, and the dance, mentioned by Homer.
pfennig
A small copper coin of Germany. It is the hundredth part of a mark, or about a quarter of a cent in United States currency.
phacellus
One of the filaments on the inner surface of the gastric cavity of certain jellyfishes.
phagedena
A canine appetite; bulimia.
phakoscope
An instrument for studying the mechanism of accommodation.
pheese
To comb; also, to beat; to worry.
phascolome
A marsupial of the genus Phascolomys; a wombat.
phanerite
Evident; visible.
pharaoh
A title by which the sovereigns of ancient Egypt were designated.
phatagin
The long-tailed pangolin (Manis tetradactyla); -- called also ipi.
pheasant
The ruffed grouse.
pheon
A bearing representing the head of a dart or javelin, with long barbs which are engrailed on the inner edge.
phelloderm
A layer of green parenchimatous cells formed on the inner side of the phellogen.
phenetol
The ethyl ether of phenol, obtained as an aromatic liquid, C6H5.O.C2H5.
philander
To make love to women; to play the male flirt.
phial
A glass vessel or bottle, especially a small bottle for medicines; a vial.
phimosis
A condition of the penis in which the prepuce can not be drawn back so as to uncover the glans penis.
piezometer
An instrument for measuring the compressibility of liquids.
piassava
A fibrous product of two Brazilian palm trees (Attalea funifera and Leopoldinia Piassaba), -- used in making brooms, and for other purposes.
phreatic
Subterranean; -- applied to sources supplying wells.
pholad
Any species of Pholas.
phloem
That portion of fibrovascular bundles which corresponds to the inner bark; the liber tissue; -- distinguished from xylem.
phiz
The face or visage.
phlebitis
Inflammation of a vein.
phoca
A genus of seals. It includes the common harbor seal and allied species. See Seal.
phoebe
The pewee, or pewit.
phosgene
Producing, or produced by, the action of light; -- formerly used specifically to designate a gas now called carbonyl chloride.
phonal
Of or relating to the voice; as, phonal structure.
phorminx
A kind of lyre used by the Greeks.
photic
Relating to the production of light by the lower animals.
phrasal
Of the nature of a phrase; consisting of a phrase; as, a phrasal adverb.
physa
A genus of fresh-water Pulmonifera, having reversed spiral shells. See Pond snail, under Pond.
phycite
See Erythrite, 1.
phryganeid
Any insect belonging to the Phryganeides.
phthalate
A salt of phthalic acid.
phylactery
Any charm or amulet worn as a preservative from danger or disease.
phyma
A tubercle on any external part of the body.
pial
Pertaining to the pia mater.
phytogeny
The doctrine of the generation of plants.
piacle
A heinous offense which requires expiation.
pian
The yaws. See Yaws.
piapec
A West African pie (Ptilostomus Senegalensis).
picra
The powder of aloes with canella, formerly officinal, employed as a cathartic.
pice
A small copper coin of the East Indies, worth less than a cent.
pibcorn
A wind instrument or pipe, with a horn at each end, -- used in Wales.
piation
The act of making atonement; expiation.
piazza
An open square in a European town, especially an Italian town; hence (Arch.), an arcaded and roofed gallery; a portico.
pica
The genus that includes the magpies.
piccadilly
A high, stiff collar for the neck; also, a hem or band about the skirt of a garment, -- worn by men in the 17th century.
pick
To throw; to pitch.
pichey
A Brazilian armadillo (Dasypus minutus); the little armadillo.
pici
A division of birds including the woodpeckers and wrynecks.
picnic
To go on a picnic, or pleasure excursion; to eat in public fashion.
picoid
Like or pertaining to the Pici.
pied
Imp. & p. p. of Pi, or Pie, v.
piddle
To deal in trifles; to concern one's self with trivial matters rather than with those that are important.
pictish
Of or pertaining to Picts; resembling the Picts.
picul
A commercial weight varying in different countries and for different commodities. In Borneo it is 135/ lbs.
piebald
Having spots and patches of black and white, or other colors; mottled; pied.
piece
A definite portion or quantity, as of goods or work; as, a piece of broadcloth; a piece of wall paper.
pieplant
A plant (Rheum Rhaponticum) the leafstalks of which are acid, and are used in making pies; the garden rhubarb.
pieman
A man who makes or sells pies.
pieno
Full; having all the instruments.
piet
The dipper, or water ouzel.
pier
Any additional or auxiliary mass of masonry used to stiffen a wall. See Buttress.
piewipe
The lapwing, or pewit.
pimaric
Pertaining to, or designating, an acid found in galipot, and isomeric with abietic acid.
pike
A foot soldier's weapon, consisting of a long wooden shaft or staff, with a pointed steel head. It is now superseded by the bayonet.
pigment
Any one of the colored substances found in animal and vegetable tissues and fluids, as bilirubin, urobilin, chlorophyll, etc.
pigfish
Any one of several species of salt-water grunts; -- called also hogfish.
piffara
A fife; also, a rude kind of oboe or a bagpipe with an inflated skin for reservoir.
pigeon
Any bird of the order Columbae, of which numerous species occur in nearly all parts of the world.
pigg
A piggin. See 1st Pig.
pight
Pitched; fixed; determined.
pigskin
The skin of a pig, -- used chiefly for making saddles; hence, a colloquial or slang term for a saddle.
pignerate
To pledge or pawn.
pigpen
A pen, or sty, for pigs.
pigtail
The tail of a pig.
pigweed
A name of several annual weeds. See Goosefoot, and Lamb's-quarters.
pilidium
The free-swimming, hat-shaped larva of certain nemertean worms. It has no resemblance to its parent, and the young worm develops in its interior.
pile
A hair; hence, the fiber of wool, cotton, and the like; also, the nap when thick or heavy, as of carpeting and velvet.
pilastered
Furnished with pilasters.
pilch
A gown or case of skin, or one trimmed or lined with fur.
pilfer
To steal in small quantities, or articles of small value; to practice petty theft.
pilgarlic
One who has lost his hair by disease; a sneaking fellow, or one who is hardly used.
pilser
An insect that flies into a flame.
pill
The peel or skin.
pilose
Hairy; full of, or made of, hair.
pilular
Of or pertaining to pills; resembling a pill or pills; as, a pilular mass.
pily
Like pile or wool.
pinna
A leaflet of a pinnate leaf. See Illust. of Bipinnate leaf, under Bipinnate.
pine
Woe; torment; pain.
pinacoid
A plane parallel to two of the crystalline axes.
pimelic
Designating the acid proper (C5H10(CO2/H)2) which is obtained from camphoric acid.
pimp
One who provides gratification for the lust of others; a procurer; a pander.
pinch
O seize; to grip; to bite; -- said of animals.
pindar
The peanut (Arachis hypogaea); -- so called in the West Indies.
pinhold
A place where a pin is fixed.
pinfeather
A feather not fully developed; esp., a rudimentary feather just emerging through the skin.
ping
The sound made by a bullet in striking a solid object or in passing through the air.
pining
Languishing; drooping; wasting away, as with longing.
pink
A vessel with a very narrow stern; -- called also pinky.
pinxit
A word appended to the artist's name or initials on a painting, or engraved copy of a painting; as, Rubens pinxit, Rubens painted (this).
pint
A measure of capacity, equal to half a quart, or four gills, -- used in liquid and dry measures. See Quart.
pinole
An aromatic powder used in Italy in the manufacture of chocolate.
pinpatch
The common English periwinkle.
pinule
One of the sights of an astrolabe.
pinweed
Any plant of the genus Lechea, low North American herbs with branching stems, and very small and abundant leaves and flowers.
pious
Of or pertaining to piety; exhibiting piety; reverential; dutiful; religious; devout; godly.
piny
Abounding with pines.
pioned
A Shakespearean word of disputed meaning; perh., "abounding in marsh marigolds."
pipe
Any long tube or hollow body of wood, metal, earthenware, or the like: especially, one used as a conductor of water, steam, gas, etc.
pipa
The Surinam toad (Pipa Americana), noted for its peculiar breeding habits.
piping
Playing on a musical pipe.
putour
A keeper of a brothel; a procurer.
pott
A size of paper. See under Paper.
podesta
One of the chief magistrates of the Italian republics in the Middle Ages.
plenal
Full; complete; as, a plenal view or act.
pith
The soft spongy substance in the center of the stems of many plants and trees, especially those of the dicotyledonous or exogenous classes.
piscary
The right or privilege of fishing in another man's waters.
piracy
The act or crime of a pirate.
pipsissewa
A low evergreen plant (Chimaphila umbellata), with narrow, wedge-lanceolate leaves, and an umbel of pretty nodding fragrant blossoms.
pippin
An apple from a tree raised from the seed and not grafted; a seedling apple.
pipra
Any one of numerous species of small clamatorial birds belonging to Pipra and allied genera, of the family Pipridae.
pipy
Like a pipe; hollow-stemmed.
piquancy
The quality or state of being piquant.
pirn
A quill or reed on which thread or yarn is wound; a bobbin; also, the wound yarn on a weaver's shuttle; also, the reel of a fishing rod.
piririgua
A South American bird (Guira guira) allied to the cuckoos.
pirl
To spin, as a top.
pirogue
A dugout canoe; by extension, any small boat.
pirrie
A rough gale of wind.
piss
To discharge urine, to urinate.
pisiform
Resembling a pea or peas in size and shape; as, a pisiform iron ore.
pise
A species of wall made of stiff earth or clay rammed in between molds which are carried up as the wall rises; -- called also pise work.
pish
An exclamation of contempt.
pismire
An ant, or emmet.
pisolitic
Composed of, containing, or resembling, pisolite.
pitch
To cover over or smear with pitch.
pistareen
An old Spanish silver coin of the value of about twenty cents.
pita
A fiber obtained from the Agave Americana and other related species, -- used for making cordage and paper.
piteous
Evincing pity, compassion, or sympathy; compassionate; tender.
pitfall
A pit deceitfully covered to entrap wild beasts or men; a trap of any kind.
plaice
A European food fish (Pleuronectes platessa), allied to the flounder, and growing to the weight of eight or ten pounds or more.
pity
A reason or cause of pity, grief, or regret; a thing to be regretted.
pitpan
A long, flat-bottomed canoe, used for the navigation of rivers and lagoons in Central America.
pitiful
Full of pity; tender-hearted; compassionate; kind; merciful; sympathetic.
pitman
One who works in a pit, as in mining, in sawing timber, etc.
pitta
Any one of a large group of bright-colored clamatorial birds belonging to Pitta, and allied genera of the family Pittidae.
pituitary
Secreting mucus or phlegm; as, the pituitary membrane, or the mucous membrane which lines the nasal cavities.
pizzicato
A direction to violinists to pluck the string with the finger, instead of using the bow. (Abrev. pizz.
pivot
A fixed pin or short axis, on the end of which a wheel or other body turns.
pixie
An old English name for a fairy; an elf.
placable
Capable of being appeased or pacified; ready or willing to be pacified; willing to forgive or condone.
plaga
A stripe of color.
plaza
A public square in a city or town.
plat
To form by interlaying interweaving; to braid; to plait.
plan
A method; a way of procedure; a custom.
plash
A small pool of standing water; a puddle.
plaudit
A mark or expression of applause; praise bestowed.
play
To engage in sport or lively recreation; to exercise for the sake of amusement; to frolic; to spot.
plectrum
A small instrument of ivory, wood, metal, or quill, used in playing upon the lyre and other stringed instruments.
plea
A cause in court; a lawsuit; as, the Court of Common Pleas. See under Common.
plebe
The common people; the mob.
pled
Imp. & p. p. of Plead
pleiad
One of the Pleiades.
plotter
One who plots or schemes; a contriver; a conspirator; a schemer.
plica
A diseased state in plants in which there is an excessive development of small entangled twigs, instead of ordinary branches.
pluroderes
A group of fresh-water turtles in which the neck can not be retracted, but is bent to one side, for protection.
plesh
A pool; a plash.
pleochroic
Having the property of pleochroism.
plerome
The central column of parenchyma in a growing stem or root.
plethora
State of being overfull; excess; superabundance.
pleura
The smooth serous membrane which closely covers the lungs and the adjacent surfaces of the thorax; the pleural membrane.
plexiform
Like network; complicated.
pleurodont
Having the teeth consolidated with the inner edge of the jaw, as in some lizards.
plevin
A warrant or assurance.
pleyt
An old term for a river boat.
pliability
The quality or state of being pliable; flexibility; as, pliability of disposition.
plitt
An instrument of punishment or torture resembling the knout, used in Russia.
plight
Imp. & p. p. of Plight, to pledge.
plied
Imp. & p. p. of Ply.
pliform
In the form of a ply, fold, or doubling.
plim
To swell, as grain or wood with water.
pliocene
Of, pertaining to, or characterizing, the most recent division of the Tertiary age.
plonge
To cleanse, as open drains which are entered by the tide, by stirring up the sediment when the tide ebbs.
ploc
A mixture of hair and tar for covering the bottom of a ship.
plod
To travel slowly but steadily; to trudge.
plot
A small extent of ground; a plat; as, a garden plot.
pletinian
Of pertaining to the Plotinists or their doctrines.
plutarchy
Plutocracy; the rule of wealth.
plug
Any piece of wood, metal, or other substance used to stop or fill a hole; a stopple.
ploy
To form a column from a line of troops on some designated subdivision; -- the opposite of deploy.
plover
Any one of numerous species of limicoline birds belonging to the family Charadridae, and especially those belonging to the subfamily Charadrinsae.
plough
Fig.: Agriculture; husbandry.
pluck
To pull; to draw.
pluff
To throw out, as smoke, dust, etc., in puffs.
pluperfect
The pluperfect tense; also, a verb in the pluperfect tense.
plum
The edible drupaceous fruit of the Prunus domestica, and of several other species of Prunus; also, the tree itself, usually called plum tree.
plunder
To take the goods of by force, or without right; to pillage; to spoil; to sack; to strip; to rob; as, to plunder travelers.
plural
Relating to, or containing, more than one; designating two or more; as, a plural word.
plus
More, required to be added; positive, as distinguished from negative; -- opposed to minus.
poake
Waste matter from the preparation of skins, consisting of hair, lime, oil, etc.
pneumatics
That branch of science which treats of the mechanical properties of air and other elastic fluids, as of their weight, pressure, elasticity, etc.
pluvial
Of or pertaining to rain; rainy.
plyer
One who, or that which, plies
pnyx
The place at Athens where the meetings of the people were held for making decrees, etc.
poach
To cook, as eggs, by breaking them into boiling water; also, to cook with butter after breaking in a vessel.
poco
A little; -- used chiefly in phrases indicating the time or movement; as, poco piu allegro, a little faster; poco largo, rather slow.
pocan
The poke (Phytolacca decandra); -- called also pocan bush.
pock
A pustule raised on the surface of the body in variolous and vaccine diseases.
podagra
Gout in the joints of the foot; -- applied also to gout in other parts of body.
poculiform
Having the shape of a goblet or drinking cup.
podder
One who collects pods or pulse.
ponvolant
A kind of light bridge, used in sieges, for surprising a post or outwork which has but a narrow moat; a flying bridge.
polder
A tract of low land reclaimed from the sea by of high embankments.
poesy
The art of composing poems; poetical skill or faculty; as, the heavenly gift of poesy.
podura
Any small leaping thysanurous insect of the genus Podura and related genera; a springtail.
podley
A young coalfish.
podge
A puddle; a plash.
podical
Anal; -- applied to certain organs of insects.
podobranch
One of the branchiae attached to the bases of the legs in Crustacea.
podrida
A miscellaneous dish of meats. See Olla-podrida.
poem
A composition, not in verse, of which the language is highly imaginative or impassioned; as, a prose poem; the poems of Ossian.
poebird
The parson bird.
poecilitic
Mottled with various colors; variegated; spotted; -- said of certain rocks.
poenamu
A variety of jade or nephrite, -- used in New Zealand for the manufacture of axes and weapons.
poephaga
A group of herbivorous marsupials including the kangaroos and their allies.
poitrel
The breastplate of the armor of a horse. See Peytrel.
poignancy
The quality or state of being poignant; as, the poignancy of satire; the poignancy of grief.
poet
One skilled in making poetry; one who has a particular genius for metrical composition; the author of a poem; an imaginative thinker or writer.
poecile
The frescoed porch or gallery in Athens where Zeno taught.
poind
To impound, as cattle.
poise
Weight; gravity; that which causes a body to descend; heaviness.
poking
Drudging; servile.
pokal
A tall drinking cup.
poke
A bag; a sack; a pocket.
poky
Confined; cramped.
polacca
A vessel with two or three masts, used in the Mediterranean. The masts are usually of one piece, and without tops, caps, or crosstrees.
pomace
The substance of apples, or of similar fruit, crushed by grinding.
polt
A blow or thump.
polka
A dance of Polish origin, but now common everywhere. It is performed by two persons in common time.
pole
A native or inhabitant of Poland; a Polander.
polianite
Manganese dioxide, occurring in tetragonal crystals nearly as hard as quartz.
poll
A parrot; -- familiarly so called.
polo
A game of ball of Eastern origin, resembling hockey, with the players on horseback.
poly
A whitish woolly plant (Teucrium Polium) of the order Labiatae, found throughout the Mediterranean region.
polverine
Glassmaker's ashes; a kind of potash or pearlash, brought from the Levant and Syria, -- used in the manufacture of fine glass.
polwig
A polliwig. Holland.
poluria
A persistently excessive flow of watery urine, with low specific gravity and without the presence of either albumin or sugar.
polyzoan
Any species of Polyzoa; one of the Polyzoa.
pomp
A procession distinguished by ostentation and splendor; a pageant.
pomiferous
Bearing pomes, or applelike fruits.
pome
A ball of silver or other metal, which is filled with hot water, and used by the priest in cold weather to warm his hands during the service.
pomfret
One of two or more species of marine food fishes of the genus Stromateus (S. niger, S. argenteus) native of Southern Europe and Asia.
pomme
Having the ends terminating in rounded protuberances or single balls; -- said of a cross.
pomologist
One versed in pomology; one who culticvates fruit trees.
pone
A kind of johnnycake.
poncho
A kind of cloak worn by the Spanish Americans, having the form of a blanket, with a slit in the middle for the head to pass through.
pond
A body of water, naturally or artificially confined, and usually of less extent than a lake.
poniard
A kind of dagger, -- usually a slender one with a triangular or square blade.
pongee
A fabric of undyed silk from India and China.
pontage
A duty or tax paid for repairing bridges.
porraceous
Resembling the leek in color; greenish.
poplar
Any tree of the genus Populus; also, the timber, which is soft, and capable of many uses.
poon
A name for several East Indian, or their wood, used for the masts and spars of vessels, as Calophyllum angustifolium, C.
pooh
Pshaw! pish! nonsense! -- an expression of scorn, dislike, or contempt.
pony
Twenty-five pounds sterling.
pood
A Russian weight, equal to forty Russian pounds or about thirty-six English pounds avoirdupois.
pookoo
A red African antelope (Kobus Vardoni) allied to the water buck.
pool
A small body of standing or stagnant water; a puddle.
pope
Any ecclesiastic, esp. a bishop.
poop
To make a noise; to pop; also, to break wind.
poor
Destitute of property; wanting in material riches or goods; needy; indigent.
popgun
A child's gun; a tube and rammer for shooting pellets, with a popping noise, by compression of air.
popinjay
The green woodpecker.
pore
One of the minute orifices in an animal or vegetable membrane, for transpiration, absorption, etc.
poraille
Poor people; the poor.
popper
A utensil for popping corn, usually a wire basket with a long handle.
populace
The common people; the vulgar; the multitude, -- comprehending all persons not distinguished by rank, office, education, or profession.
porbeagle
A species of shark (Lamna cornubica), about eight feet long, having a pointed nose and a crescent-shaped tail; -- called also mackerel shark.
porcate
Having grooves or furrows broader than the intervening ridges; furrowed.
pork
The flesh of swine, fresh or salted, used for food.
porgy
The sailor's choice, or pinfish.
porifera
A grand division of the Invertebrata, including the sponges; -- called also Spongiae, Spongida, and Spongiozoa.
porosity
The quality or state of being porous; -- opposed to density.
porphyrite
A rock with a porphyritic structure; as, augite porphyrite.
pottassic
Pertaining to, or containing, potassium.
posology
The science or doctrine of doses; dosology.
pose
Standing still, with all the feet on the ground; -- said of the attitude of a lion, horse, or other beast.
port
A dark red or purple astringent wine made in Portugal. It contains a large percentage of alcohol.
pory
Porous; as, pory stone. [R.] Dryden.
posied
Inscribed with a posy.
posnet
A little basin; a porringer; a skillet.
post
Hired to do what is wrong; suborned.
pospolite
A kind of militia in Poland, consisting of the gentry, which, in case of invasion, was summoned to the defense of the country.
poss
To push; to dash; to throw.
posy
A brief poetical sentiment; hence, any brief sentiment, motto, or legend; especially, one inscribed on a ring.
potable
Fit to be drunk; drinkable.
pother
Bustle; confusion; tumult; flutter; bother.
potch
To thrust; to push.
potassoxyl
The radical KO, derived from, and supposed to exist in, potassium hydroxide and other compounds.
potboiler
A term applied derisively to any literary or artistic work, and esp. a painting, done simply for money and the means of living.
poteen
Whisky; especially, whisky illicitly distilled by the Irish peasantry.
potgun
A pot-shaped cannon; a mortar.
potman
A pot companion.
potion
A draught; a dose; usually, a draught or dose of a liquid medicine.
potlid
The lid or cover of a pot.
potpie
A meat pie which is boiled instead of being baked.
potoo
A large South American goatsucker (Nyctibius grandis).
potsherd
A piece or fragment of a broken pot.
prussian
Of or pertaining to Prussia.
pretend
To lay a claim to; to allege a title to; to claim.
prakritic
Pertaining to Prakrit.
powder
The fine particles to which any dry substance is reduced by pounding, grinding, or triturating, or into which it falls by decay; dust.
poupeton
A puppet, or little baby.
poudrette
A manure made from night soil, dried and mixed with charcoal, gypsum, etc.
potulent
Fit to drink; potable.
pouch
A small bag; usually, a leathern bag; as, a pouch for money; a shot pouch; a mail pouch, etc.
poulaine
A long pointed shoe. See Cracowes.
pounce
A fine powder, as of sandarac, or cuttlefish bone, -- formerly used to prevent ink from spreading on manuscript.
pout
The young of some birds, as grouse; a young fowl.
pour
To send forth as in a stream or a flood; to emit; to let escape freely or wholly.
poussette
A movement, or part of a figure, in the contradance.
poverty
The quality or state of being poor or indigent; want or scarcity of means of subsistence; indigence; need.
powen
A small British lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeoides, or C. ferus); -- called also gwyniad and lake herring.
pozzolana
Volcanic ashes from Pozzuoli, in Italy, used in the manufacture of a kind of mortar which hardens under water.
powwow
To use conjuration, with noise and confusion, for the cure of disease, etc., as among the North American Indians.
power
Capacity of undergoing or suffering; fitness to be acted upon; susceptibility; -- called also passive power; as, great power of endurance.
powpow
A priest, or conjurer, among the North American Indians.
poynder
See Poind, Poinder.
poyou
A South American armadillo (Dasypus sexcinctus). Called also sixbanded armadillo.
praecava
The superior vena cava.
praam
A flat-bottomed boat or lighter, -- used in Holland and the Baltic, and sometimes armed in case of war.
practic
Artful; deceitful; skillful.
pragmatic
One skilled in affairs.
prairial
The ninth month of the French Republican calendar, which dated from September 22, 1792. It began May, 20, and ended June 18.
predacean
A carnivorous animal.
pray
To address earnest request to; to supplicate; to entreat; to implore; to beseech.
prate
To talk much and to little purpose; to be loquacious; to speak foolishly; to babble.
prance
To spring or bound, as a horse in high mettle.
prase
A variety of cryptocrystalline of a leek-green color.
pravity
Deterioration; degeneracy; corruption; especially, moral crookedness; moral perversion; perverseness; depravity; as, the pravity of human nature.
praxis
Use; practice; especially, exercise or discipline for a specific purpose or object.
precation
The act of praying; supplication; entreaty.
preach
To give serious advice on morals or religion; to discourse in the manner of a preacher.
prebendal
Of or pertaining to a prebend; holding a prebend; as, a prebendal priest or stall.
preatory
Suppliant; beseeching.
precaution
Previous caution or care; caution previously employed to prevent mischief or secure good; as, his life was saved by precaution.
prelacy
The office or dignity of a prelate; church government by prelates.
preglacial
Prior to the glacial or drift period.
preelect
To elect beforehand.
preface
The prelude or introduction to the canon of the Mass.
prehallux
An extra first toe, or rudiment of a toe, on the preaxial side of the hallux.
prejudge
To judge before hearing, or before full and sufficient examination; to decide or sentence by anticipation; to condemn beforehand.
preobtain
To obtain beforehand.
premature
Mature or ripe before the proper time; as, the premature fruits of a hotbed.
prenasal
Situated in front of the nose, or in front of the nasal chambers.
preregnant
One who reigns before another; a sovereign predecessor.
preparable
Capable of being prepared.
presage
Something which foreshows or portends a future event; a prognostic; an omen; an augury.
profession
The act of professing or claiming; open declaration; public avowal or acknowledgment; as, professions of friendship; a profession of faith.
prior
The superior of a priory, and next below an abbot in dignity.
pride
A small European lamprey (Petromyzon branchialis); -- called also prid, and sandpiper.
prey
Anything, as goods, etc., taken or got by violence; anything taken by force from an enemy in war; spoil; booty; plunder.
prevail
To persuade or induce; -- with on, upon, or with; as, I prevailedon him to wait.
prewarn
To warn beforehand; to forewarn.
prial
A corruption of pair royal. See under Pair, n.
price
Value; estimation; excellence; worth.
prill
A nugget of virgin metal.
prie
The plant privet.
prig
To haggle about the price of a commodity; to bargain hard.
prim
Formal; precise; affectedly neat or nice; as, prim regularity; a prim person.
prince
The son of a king or emperor, or the issue of a royal family; as, princes of the blood.
probable
Capable of being proved.
privacy
The state of being in retirement from the company or observation of others; seclusion.
pris
See Price, and 1st Prize.
pritch
A sharp-pointed instrument; also, an eelspear.
prize
That which is taken from another; something captured; a thing seized by force, stratagem, or superior power.
proa
A sailing canoe of the Ladrone Islands and Malay Archipelago, having its lee side flat and its weather side like that of an ordinary boat.
proem
Preface; introduction; preliminary observations; prelude.
procacious
Pert; petulant; forward; saucy.
prod
A pointed instrument for pricking or puncturing, as a goad, an awl, a skewer, etc.
proface
Much good may it do you! -- a familiar salutation or welcome.
provessel
Openly declared, avowed, acknowledged, or claimed; as, a professed foe; a professed tyrant; a professed Christian.
prosaical
Of or pertaining to prose; resembling prose; in the form of prose; unpoetical; writing or using prose; as, a prosaic composition.
prolapse
The falling down of a part through the orifice with which it is naturally connected, especially of the uterus or the rectum.
proin
To lop; to trim; to prune; to adorn.
prog
To wander about and beg; to seek food or other supplies by low arts; to seek for advantage by mean shift or tricks.
prohibit
To hinder; to debar; to prevent; to preclude.
project
The place from which a thing projects, or starts forth.
proke
To poke; to thrust.
proof
Any effort, process, or operation designed to establish or discover a fact or truth; an act of testing; a test; a trial.
promenade
A walk for pleasure, display, or exercise.
pronaos
The porch or vestibule of a temple.
prop
A shell, used as a die. See Props.
proratable
Capable of being prorated, or divided proportionately.
prow
The fore part of a vessel; the bow; the stem; hence, the vessel itself.
provable
Capable of being proved; demonstrable.
protactic
Giving a previous narrative or explanation, as of the plot or personages of a play; introductory.
proud
Feeling or manifesting pride, in a good or bad sense
proant
Provender or food.
provant
To supply with provender or provisions; to provide for.
prudence
The quality or state of being prudent; wisdom in the way of caution and provision; discretion; carefulness; hence, also, economy; frugality.
prox
"The ticket or list of candidates at elections, presented to the people for their votes."
pruce
Prussian leather.
prune
To cut off or cut out, as useless parts.
pruinose
Frosty; covered with fine scales, hairs, dust, bloom, or the like, so as to give the appearance of frost.
pruriency
The quality or state of being prurient.
pulkha
A Laplander's traveling sledge. See Sledge.
pubble
Puffed out, pursy; pudgy; fat.
psittacid
Of or pertaining to the parrots, or the Psittaci.
psarolite
A silicified stem of tree fern, found in abundance in the Triassic sandstone.
prytany
The period during which the presidency of the senate belonged to the prytanes of the section.
prutenic
Prussian; -- applied to certain astronomical tables published in the sixteenth century, founded on the principles of Copernicus, a Prussian.
prying
Inspecting closely or impertinently.
psalm
A sacred song; a poetical composition for use in the praise or worship of God.
psammite
A species of micaceous sandstone.
pseudocarp
That portion of an anthocarpous fruit which is not derived from the ovary, as the soft part of a strawberry or of a fig.
psellism
Indistinct pronunciation; stammering.
psephism
A proposition adopted by a majority of votes; especially, one adopted by vote of the Athenian people; a statute.
pshaw
Pish! pooch! -- an exclamation used as an expression of contempt, disdain, dislike, etc.
psilology
Love of empty of empty talk or noise.
ptilopteri
An order of birds including only the penguins.
psylla
Any leaping plant louse of the genus Psylla, or family Psyllidae.
psora
A cutaneous disease; especially, the itch.
psychal
Of or pertaining to the soul; psychical.
ptarmigan
Any grouse of the genus Lagopus, of which numerous species are known. The feet are completely feathered.
pteroceras
A genus of large marine gastropods having the outer border of the lip divided into lobes; -- called also scorpion shell.
ptosis
Drooping of the upper eyelid, produced by paralysis of its levator muscle.
ptisan
A decoction of barley with other ingredients; a farinaceous drink.
ptolemaic
Of or pertaining to Ptolemy, the geographer and astronomer.
ptyalin
An unorganized amylolytic ferment, on enzyme, present in human mixed saliva and in the saliva of some animals.
ptyxis
The way in which a leaf is sometimes folded in the bud.
pudu
A very small deer (Pudua humilis), native of the Chilian Andes. It has simple spikelike antlers, only two or three inches long.
pucherite
Vanadate of bismuth, occurring in minute reddish brown crystals.
public
Open to the knowledge or view of all; general; common; notorious; as, public report; public scandal.
puberal
Of or pertaining to puberty.
pubic
Of or pertaining to the pubes; in the region of the pubes; as, the pubic bone; the pubic region, or the lower part of the hypogastric region.
puccoon
Any one of several plants yielding a red pigment which is used by the North American Indians, as the bloodroot and two species of Lithospermum (L.
puce
Of a dark brown or brownish purple color.
pudency
Modesty; shamefacedness.
puck
A celebrated fairy, "the merry wanderer of the night;" -- called also Robin Goodfellow, Friar Rush, Pug, etc.
puddening
A quantity of rope-yarn, or the like, placed, as a fender, on the bow of a boat.
pudgy
Short and fat or sturdy; dumpy; podgy; as, a short, pudgy little man; a pudgy little hand.
pudic
Of or pertaining to the external organs of generation.
pugnacious
Disposed to fight; inclined to fighting; quarrelsome; fighting.
pugging
The act or process of working and tempering clay to make it plastic and of uniform consistency, as for bricks, for pottery, etc.
puer
The dung of dogs, used as an alkaline steep in tanning.
puff
A sudden and single emission of breath from the mouth; hence, any sudden or short blast of wind; a slight gust; a whiff.
pugh
Pshaw! pish! -- a word used in contempt or disdain.
pugil
As much as is taken up between the thumb and two first fingers.
puke
To eject the contests of the stomach; to vomit; to spew.
puisne
Later in age, time, etc.; subsequent.
puit
A well; a small stream; a fountain; a spring.
pule
To cry like a chicken.
pulas
The East Indian leguminous tree Butea frondosa. See Gum Butea, under Gum.
pulicene
Pertaining to, or abounding in, fleas; pulicose.
puppet
A small image in the human form; a doll.
pumy
Large and rounded.
pultaceous
Macerated; softened; nearly fluid.
pulp
A moist, slightly cohering mass, consisting of soft, undissolved animal or vegetable matter.
pull
To draw, or attempt to draw, toward one; to draw forcibly.
pulmograde
Swimming by the expansion and contraction, or lunglike movement, of the body, or of the disk, as do the medusae.
pulque
An intoxicating Mexican drink. See Agave.
pulsate
To throb, as a pulse; to beat, as the heart.
puma
A large American carnivore (Felis concolor), found from Canada to Patagonia, especially among the mountains.
purverable
Capable of being reduced to fine powder.
pulverate
To beat or reduce to powder or dust; to pulverize.
pumicate
To make smooth with pumice.
pump
A low shoe with a thin sole.
punnet
A broad, shallow basket, for displaying fruit or flowers.
pung
A kind of plain sleigh drawn by one horse; originally, a rude oblong box on runners.
punch
The buffoon or harlequin of a puppet show.
pundle
A short and fat woman; a squab.
punic
Of or pertaining to the ancient Carthaginians.
punk
Wood so decayed as to be dry, crumbly, and useful for tinder; touchwood.
puny
Imperfectly developed in size or vigor; small and feeble; inferior; petty.
punster
One who puns, or is skilled in, or given to, punning; a quibbler; a low wit.
punt
To play at basset, baccara, faro. or omber; to gamble.
pupa
Any insect in that stage of its metamorphosis which usually immediately precedes the adult, or imago, stage.
pupigerous
Bearing or containing a pupa; -- said of dipterous larvae which do not molt when the pupa is formed within them.
purse
Hence, a treasury; finances; as, the public purse.
purfile
A sort of ancient trimming of tinsel and thread for women's gowns; -- called also bobbinwork.
purchase
To pursue and obtain; to acquire by seeking; to gain, obtain, or acquire.
puranic
Pertaining to the Puranas.
purblind
Nearsighted, or dim-sighted; seeing obscurely; as, a purblind eye; a purblind mole.
purdah
A curtain or screen; also, a cotton fabric in blue and white stripes, used for curtains.
pure
Free from moral defilement or quilt; hence, innocent; guileless; chaste; -- applied to persons.
purl
To decorate with fringe or embroidery.
purgament
That which is excreted; excretion.
purifier
One who, or that which, purifies or cleanses; a cleanser; a refiner.
purparty
A share, part, or portion of an estate allotted to a coparcener.
purr
To murmur as a cat. See Pur.
push
A pustule; a pimple.
purvey
To furnish or provide, as with a convenience, provisions, or the like.
purtenance
That which pertains or belongs to something; esp., the heard, liver, and lungs of an animal.
purulency
The quality or state of being purulent; the generation of pus; also, the pus itself.
pusane
A piece of armor for the breast; often, an addition to, or reenforcement of. the breastplate; -- called also pesane.
puseyism
The principles of Dr. Pusey and others at Oxford, England, as exhibited in various publications, esp.
pustulant
Producing pustules.
pusil
Very small; little; petty.
puss
A cat; -- a fondling appellation.
puteal
An inclosure surrounding a well to prevent persons from falling into it; a well curb.
putage
Prostitution or fornication on the part of a woman.
putid
Rotten; fetid; stinking; base; worthless. Jer. Taylor.
rearrange
To arrange again; to arrange in a different way.
radula
The chitinous ribbon bearing the teeth of mollusks; -- called also lingual ribbon, and tongue. See Odontophore.
quat
An annoying, worthless person.
pyre
A funeral pile; a combustible heap on which the dead are burned; hence, any pile to be burnt.
pygropodes
A division of swimming birds which includes the grebes, divers, auks, etc., in which the legs are placed far back.
pyelitis
Inflammation of the pelvis of the kidney.
puzzel
A harlot; a drab; a hussy.
putrefy
To render putrid; to cause to decay offensively; to cause to be decomposed; to cause to rot.
putter
One who puts or plates.
pyaemia
A form of blood poisoning produced by the absorption into the blood of morbid matters usually originating in a wound or local inflammation.
pycnidium
In certain fungi, a flask-shaped cavity from the surface of the inner walls of which spores are produced.
pygidium
The caudal plate of trilobites, crustacean, and certain insects. See Illust. of Limulus and Trilobite.
pyet
A magpie; a piet.
pygargus
A quadruped, probably the addax, an antelope having a white rump.
pygmean
Of or pertaining to a pygmy; resembling a pygmy or dwarf; dwarfish; very small.
pygopod
One of the Pygopodes.
pylon
A low tower, having a truncated pyramidal form, and flanking an ancient Egyptian gateway.
pyjama
In India and Persia, thin loose trowsers or drawers; in Europe and America, drawers worn at night, or a kind of nightdress with legs.
pygopodous
Of or pertaining to the Pygopodes.
pyin
An albuminoid constituent of pus, related to mucin, possibly a mixture of substances rather than a single body.
pykar
An ancient English fishing boat.
pyla
The passage between the iter and optocoele in the brain.
pyoid
Of or pertaining to pus; of the nature of, or like, pus.
pyocyanin
A blue coloring matter found in the pus from old sores, supposed to be formed through the agency of a species of bacterium (Bacillus pyocyaneus).
pyogenic
Producing or generating pus.
pyot
The magpie. See Piet.
pyracanth
The evergreen thorn (Crataegus Pyracantha), a shrub native of Europe.
quack
To utter a sound like the cry of a duck.
pyrrhic
Of or pertaining to an ancient Greek martial dance.
pyro
Abbreviation of pyrogallic acid.
pyrgom
A variety of pyroxene; -- called also fassaite.
pyridic
Related to, or formed from, pyridin or its homologues; as, the pyridic bases.
purocoll
A yellow crystalline substance allied to pyrrol, obtained by the distillation of gelatin.
pyrogallic
Pertaining to, derived from, or designating, an acid called pyrogallol. See Pyrogallol.
pyuria
A morbid condition in which pus is discharged in the urine.
pyrula
A genus of large marine gastropods. having a pear-shaped shell. It includes the fig-shells. See Illust.
pythiad
The period intervening between one celebration of the Pythian games and the next.
pyxidate
Having a pyxidium.
quab
An unfledged bird; hence, something immature or unfinished.
quaich
A small shallow cup or drinking vessel.
quaff
To drink with relish; to drink copiously of; to swallow in large draughts.
quade
Evil; bad; baffling; as, a quade wind.
quaere
Inquire; question; see; -- used to signify doubt or to suggest investigation.
quaggy
Of the nature of a quagmire; yielding or trembling under the foot, as soft, wet earth; spongy; boggy.
quahaug
An American market clam (Venus mercenaria). It is sold in large quantities, and is highly valued as food.
quamoclit
Formerly, a genus of plants including the cypress vine (Quamoclit vulgaris, now called Ipomoea Quamoclit).
quake
To be agitated with quick, short motions continually repeated; to shake with fear, cold, etc.; to shudder; to tremble.
qualified
Fitted by accomplishments or endowments.
quarantine
A space of forty days; -- used of Lent.
quandary
A state of difficulty or perplexity; doubt; uncertainty.
quas
A kind of beer. Same as Quass.
quiver
To shake or move with slight and tremulous motion; to tremble; to quake; to shudder; to shiver.
quesal
The long-tailed, or resplendent, trogon (Pharomachus mocinno, formerly Trogon resplendens), native of Southern Mexico and Central America.
quegh
A drinking vessel. See Quaich.
queach
A thick, bushy plot; a thicket.
quaver
To tremble; to vibrate; to shake.
quay
To furnish with quays.
queck
A word occurring in a corrupt passage of Bacon's Essays, and probably meaning, to stir, to move.
queen
The wife of a king.
quemeful
Kindly; merciful.
queint
Imp. & p. p. of Quench.
quell
To be subdued or abated; to yield; to abate.
quench
To cool suddenly, as heated steel, in tempering.
quercitin
A yellow crystalline substance, occurring quite widely distributed in the vegetable kingdom, as is apple-tree bark, horse-chestnut leaves, etc.
quiesce
To be silent, as a letter; to have no sound.
quibble
A shift or turn from the point in question; a trifling or evasive distinction; an evasion; a cavil.
quet
The common guillemot.
queue
A tail-like appendage of hair; a pigtail.
quica
A small South American opossum (Didelphys quica), native of Guiana and Brazil. It feeds upon insects, small birds, and fruit.
quid
A portion suitable to be chewed; a cud; as, a quid of tobacco.
quip
A smart, sarcastic turn or jest; a taunt; a severe retort; a gibe.
quill
One of the large feathers of a bird's wing, or one of the rectrices of the tail; also, the stock of such a feather.
quin
A European scallop (Pecten opercularis), used as food.
quirboilly
Leather softened by boiling so as to take any required shape. Upon drying, it becomes exceedingly hard, and hence was formerly used for armor.
quit
Any one of numerous species of small passerine birds native of tropical America. See Banana quit, under Banana, and Guitguit.
rabdology
The method or art of performing arithmetical operations by means of Napier's bones. See Napier's bones.
quoll
A marsupial of Australia (Dasyurus macrurus), about the size of a cat.
quob
To throb; to quiver.
quixotic
Like Don Quixote; romantic to extravagance; absurdly chivalric; apt to be deluded.
quiz
A riddle or obscure question; an enigma; a ridiculous hoax.
quod
A quadrangle or court, as of a prison; hence, a prison.
quoin
Originally, a solid exterior angle, as of a building; now, commonly, one of the selected pieces of material by which the corner is marked.
raash
The electric catfish.
quondam
Having been formerly; former; sometime.
quota
A proportional part or share; the share or proportion assigned to each in a division.
rabat
A polishing material made of potter's clay that has failed in baking.
rabbate
To abate or diminish.
racial
Of or pertaining to a race or family of men; as, the racial complexion.
raca
A term of reproach used by the Jews of our Savior's time, meaning "worthless."
rabid
Furious; raging; extremely violent.
rabot
A rubber of hard wood used in smoothing marble to be polished.
race
The descendants of a common ancestor; a family, tribe, people, or nation, believed or presumed to belong to the same stock; a lineage; a breed.
rache
A dog that pursued his prey by scent, as distinguished from the greyhound.
racy
Having a strong flavor indicating origin; of distinct characteristic taste; tasting of the soil; hence, fresh; rich.
rack
The neck and spine of a fore quarter of veal or mutton.
raconteur
A relater; a storyteller.
radeau
A float; a raft.
radde
Imp. of Read, Rede.
radial
Of or pertaining to a radius or ray; consisting of, or like, radii or rays; radiated; as, (Bot.) radial projections; (Zool.
rape
Fruit, as grapes, plucked from the cluster.
rale
An adventitious sound, usually of morbid origin, accompanying the normal respiratory sounds. See Rhonchus.
ragguled
Notched in regular diagonal breaks; -- said of a line, or a bearing having such an edge.
raghuvansa
A celebrated Sanskrit poem having for its subject the Raghu dynasty.
ragabrash
An idle, ragged person.
raff
To sweep, snatch, draw, or huddle together; to take by a promiscuous sweep.
raft
Imp. & p. p. of Reave.
rage
Violent excitement; eager passion; extreme vehemence of desire, emotion, or suffering, mastering the will.
ragged
Rent or worn into tatters, or till the texture is broken; as, a ragged coat; a ragged sail.
ragman
A man who collects, or deals in, rags.
raging
A. & n. from Rage, v. i.
raglan
A loose overcoat with large sleeves; -- named from Lord Raglan, an English general.
ragout
A dish made of pieces of meat, stewed, and highly seasoned; as, a ragout of mutton.
ragpicker
One who gets a living by picking up rags and refuse things in the streets.
rain
Water falling in drops from the clouds; the descent of water from the clouds in drops.
raid
A hostile or predatory incursion; an inroad or incursion of mounted men; a sudden and rapid invasion by a cavalry force; a foray.
ragweed
A common American composite weed (Ambrosia artemisiaefolia) with finely divided leaves; hogweed.
raia
A genus of rays which includes the skates. See Skate.
rail
An outer cloak or covering; a neckerchief for women.
raiment
Clothing in general; vesture; garments; -- usually singular in form, with a collective sense.
rajah
A native prince or king; also, a landholder or person of importance in the agricultural districts.
raip
A rope; also, a measure equal to a rod.
raisable
Capable of being raised.
rake
A toothed machine drawn by a horse, -- used for collecting hay or grain; a horserake.
raking
The act or process of using a rake; the going over a space with a rake.
ramrod
The rod used in ramming home the charge in a muzzle-loading firearm.
ramed
Having the frames, stem, and sternpost adjusted; -- said of a ship on the stocks.
ralstonite
A fluoride of alumina and soda occurring with the Greenland cryolite in octahedral crystals.
ralliance
The act of rallying.
ralph
A name sometimes given to the raven.
ramadan
The ninth Mohammedan month.
ramberge
Formerly, a kind of large war galley.
rammer
One who, or that which, rams or drives.
ramie
The grass-cloth plant (B/hmeria nivea); also, its fiber, which is very fine and exceedingly strong; -- called also China grass, and rhea.
ramline
A line used to get a straight middle line, as on a spar, or from stem to stern in building a vessel.
ramoon
A small West Indian tree (Trophis Americana) of the Mulberry family, whose leaves and twigs are used as fodder for cattle.
ramp
To spring; to leap; to bound; to rear; to prance; to become rampant; hence, to frolic; to romp.
rang
Imp. of Ring, v. t. & i.
rana
A genus of anurous batrachians, including the common frogs.
ramshackle
Loose; disjointed; falling to pieces; out of repair.
ramulose
Having many small branches, or ramuli.
rance
A prop or shore.
rand
A border; edge; margin.
ransack
To search thoroughly; to search every place or part of; as, to ransack a house.
rani
A queen or princess; the wife of a rajah.
rank
Luxuriant in growth; of vigorous growth; exuberant; grown to immoderate height; as, rank grass; rank weeds.
ranula
A cyst formed under the tongue by obstruction of the duct of the submaxillary gland.
rant
High-sounding language, without importance or dignity of thought; boisterous, empty declamation; bombast; as, the rant of fanatics.
rapacious
Given to plunder; disposed or accustomed to seize by violence; seizing by force.
raught
Imp. & p. p. of Reach.
rasp
To rub or file with a rasp; to rub or grate with a rough file; as, to rasp wood to make it smooth; to rasp bones to powder.
rarity
The quality or state of being rare; rareness; thinness; as, the rarity (contrasted with the density) of gases.
rappage
The enlargement of a mold caused by rapping the pattern.
raphaelism
The principles of painting introduced by Raphael, the Italian painter.
rapid
Very swift or quick; moving with celerity; fast; as, a rapid stream; a rapid flight; a rapid motion.
rapt
Imp. & p. p. of Rap, to snatch away.
rare
Nearly raw; partially cooked; not thoroughly cooked; underdone; as, rare beef or mutton.
rash
To pull off or pluck violently.
rascal
One of the rabble; a low, common sort of person or creature; collectively, the rabble; the common herd; also, a lean, ill-conditioned beast, esp.
rase
To rub along the surface of; to graze.
raskolnik
One of the separatists or dissenters from the established or Greek church in Russia.
rasores
An order of birds; the Gallinae.
rath
A hill or mound.
rata
A New Zealand forest tree (Metrosideros robusta), also, its hard dark red wood, used by the Maoris for paddles and war clubs.
rasse
A carnivore (Viverricula Mallaccensis) allied to the civet but smaller, native of China and the East Indies.
rasure
The act of rasing, scraping, or erasing; erasure; obliteration.
ratch
A ratchet wheel, or notched bar, with which a pawl or click works.
rate
To chide with vehemence; to scold; to censure violently.
ratsbane
Rat poison; white arsenic.
ratifier
One who, or that which, ratifies; a confirmer.
ratlins
The small transverse ropes attached to the shrouds and forming the steps of a rope ladder.
ratteen
A thick woolen stuff quilled or twilled.
raucid
Hoarse; raucous.
razor
A keen-edged knife of peculiar shape, used in shaving the hair from the face or the head.
rawly
In a raw manner; unskillfully; without experience.
ravine
Food obtained by violence; plunder; prey; raven.
ravage
To lay waste by force; to desolate by violence; to commit havoc or devastation upon; to spoil; to plunder; to consume.
rave
One of the upper side pieces of the frame of a wagon body or a sleigh.
rawboned
Having little flesh on the bones; gaunt.
rawhead
A specter mentioned to frighten children; as, rawhead and bloodybones.
rayless
Destitute of rays; hence, dark; not illuminated; blind; as, a rayless sky; rayless eyes.
rawness
The quality or state of being raw.
rayah
A person not a Mohammedan, who pays the capitation tax.
rayonnant
Darting forth rays, as the sun when it shines out.
raze
A Shakespearean word (used once) supposed to mean the same as race, a root.
reagent
A substance capable of producing with another a reaction, especially when employed to detect the presence of other bodies; a test.
reaccess
A second access or approach; a return.
razure
The act of erasing or effacing, or the state of being effaced; obliteration. See Rasure.
razzia
A plundering and destructive incursion; a foray; a raid.
read
Rennet. See 3d Reed.
reaffirm
To affirm again.
reannex
To annex again or anew; to reunite.
real
A small Spanish silver coin; also, a denomination of money of account, formerly the unit of the Spanish monetary system.
ream
Cream; also, the cream or froth on ale.
rear
The back or hindmost part; that which is behind, or last in order; -- opposed to front.
reap
To cut with a sickle, scythe, or reaping machine, as grain; to gather, as a harvest, by cutting.
reremouse
The leather-winged bat (Vespertilio murinus).
renne
To plunder; -- only in the phrase "to rape and renne." See under Rap, v. t., to snatch.
refaction
Recompense; atonement; retribution.
redcap
The European goldfinch.
recadency
A falling back or descending a second time; a relapse.
rebec
An instrument formerly used which somewhat resembled the violin, having three strings, and being played with a bow.
reaumur
Of or pertaining to Rene Antoine Ferchault de Reaumur; conformed to the scale adopted by Reaumur in graduating the thermometer he invented.
reascend
To rise, mount, or climb again.
reattach
To attach again.
reave
To take away by violence or by stealth; to snatch away; to rob; to despoil; to bereave. [Archaic]
rebanish
To banish again.
reboant
Rebellowing; resounding loudly.
rebiting
The act or process of deepening worn lines in an etched plate by submitting it again to the action of acid.
reblossom
To blossom again.
rebreathe
To breathe again.
rebuff
Repercussion, or beating back; a quick and sudden resistance.
recoct
To boil or cook again; hence, to make over; to vamp up; to reconstruct.
recidivate
To backslide; to fall again.
recede
To move back; to retreat; to withdraw.
rechange
To change again, or change back.
reck
To make account of; to care for; to heed; to regard.
reclaim
To claim back; to demand the return of as a right; to attempt to recover possession of.
recumb
To lean; to recline; to repose.
recreancy
The quality or state of being recreant.
rectal
Of or pertaining to the rectum; in the region of the rectum.
redact
To reduce to form, as literary matter; to digest and put in shape (matter for publication); to edit.
redbird
The cardinal bird.
redtail
The red-tailed hawk.
redly
In a red manner; with redness.
redfin
A small North American dace (Minnilus cornutus, or Notropis megalops). The male, in the breeding season, has bright red fins.
redde
Obs. imp. of Read, or Rede.
rede
To advise or counsel.
redhead
A person having red hair.
redia
A kind of larva, or nurse, which is prroduced within the sporocyst of certain trematodes by asexual generation.
redpoll
Any one of several species of small northern finches of the genus Acanthis (formerly Aegiothus), native of Europe and America.
redness
The quality or state of being red; red color.
redolency
The quality of being redolent; sweetness of scent; pleasant odor; fragrance.
redraft
To draft or draw anew.
redsear
To be brittle when red-hot; to be red-short.
reek
Vapor; steam; smoke; fume.
reecho
To echo back; to reverberate again; as, the hills reecho the roar of cannon.
redub
To refit; to repair, or make reparation for; hence, to repay or requite.
redweed
The red poppy (Papaver Rhoeas).
reed
The fourth stomach of a ruminant; rennet.
reef
A chain or range of rocks lying at or near the surface of the water. See Coral reefs, under Coral.
reenaction
The act of reenacting; the state of being reenacted.
reel
A lively dance of the Highlanders of Scotland; also, the music to the dance; -- often called Scotch reel.
reem
The Hebrew name of a horned wild animal, probably the Urus.
reexamine
To examine anew.
reeve
The female of the ruff.
reezed
Grown rank; rancid; rusty.
reis
The word is used as a Portuguese designation of money of account, one hundred reis being about equal in value to eleven cents.
regma
A kind of dry fruit, consisting of three or more cells, each which at length breaks open at the inner angle.
reft
A chink; a rift. See Rift.
reflame
To kindle again into flame.
refect
To restore after hunger or fatigue; to refresh.
refigure
To figure again.
reforge
To forge again or anew; hence, to fashion or fabricate anew; to make over.
refract
To bend sharply and abruptly back; to break off.
regelate
To freeze together again; to undergo regelation, as ice.
refuge
Shelter or protection from danger or distress.
regain
To gain anew; to get again; to recover, as what has escaped or been lost; to reach again.
regian
An upholder of kingly authority; a royalist.
regle
To rule; to govern.
rehear
To hear again; to try a second time; as, to rehear a cause in Chancery.
regrade
To retire; to go back.
regnal
Of or pertaining to the reign of a monarch; as, regnal years.
regorge
To vomit up; to eject from the stomach; to throw back.
regulable
Capable of being regulated.
rehash
To hash over again; to prepare or use again; as, to rehash old arguments.
reillume
To light again; to cause to shine anew; to relume; to reillumine.
rehibition
The returning of a thing purchased to the seller, on the ground of defect or frand.
reigle
A hollow cut or channel for quiding anything; as, the reigle of a side post for a flood gate.
reim
A strip of oxhide, deprived of hair, and rendered pliable, -- used for twisting into ropes, etc.
rein
The strap of a bridle, fastened to the curb or snaffle on each side, by which the rider or driver governs the horse.
remade
Imp. & p. p. of Remake.
relade
To lade or load again.
rejoice
To feel joy; to experience gladness in a high degree; to have pleasurable satisfaction; to be delighted.
reiter
A German cavalry soldier of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
reject
To cast from one; to throw away; to discard.
rejudge
To judge again; to reexamine; to review; to call to a new trial and decision.
rekindle
To kindle again.
reliable
Suitable or fit to be relied on; worthy of dependance or reliance; trustworthy.
relbun
The roots of the Chilian plant Calceolaria arachnoidea, -- used for dyeing crimson.
releasable
That may be released.
reload
To load again, as a gun.
relucent
Reflecting light; shining; glittering; glistening; bright; luminous; splendid.
remuable
That may be removed; removable.
remiform
Shaped like an oar.
remblai
Earth or materials made into a bank after having been excavated.
remean
To give meaning to; to explain the meaning of; to interpret.
remnant
Remaining; yet left.
remodel
To model or fashion anew; to change the form of.
rend
To part or tear off forcibly; to take away by force.
renable
Reasonable; also, loquacious.
rencounter
To meet unexpectedly; to encounter.
reng
A rung or round of a ladder.
renegade
One faithless to principle or party.
reniform
Having the form or shape of a kidney; as, a reniform mineral; a reniform leaf.
rhachidian
Of or pertaining to the rhachis; as, the rhachidian teeth of a mollusk.
resoluble
Admitting of being resolved; resolvable; as, bodies resoluble by fire.
replace
To place again; to restore to a former place, position, condition, or the like.
reoppose
To oppose again.
renverse
Reversed; set with the head downward; turned contrary to the natural position.
renounce
To cast off or reject deliberately; to disown; to dismiss; to forswear.
rent
Imp. & p. p. of Rend.
reobtain
To obtain again.
reoccupy
To occupy again.
repeal
To recall; to summon again, as persons.
reordain
To ordain again, as when the first ordination is considered defective.
repace
To pace again; to walk over again in a contrary direction.
repine
To fail; to wane.
repkie
Any edible sea urchin.
rerebrace
Armor for the upper part of the arm.
reptant
Creeping; crawling; -- said of reptiles, worms, etc.
repolish
To polish again.
represent
To present again or anew; to present by means of something standing in the place of; to exhibit the counterpart or image of; to typify.
republic
A state in which the sovereign power resides in the whole body of the people, and is exercised by representatives elected by them; a commonwealth.
request
The act of asking for anything desired; expression of desire or demand; solicitation; prayer; petition; entreaty.
rese
To shake; to quake; to tremble.
resail
To sail again; also, to sail back, as to a former port.
rescat
To ransom; to release; to rescue.
reship
To ship again; to put on board of a vessel a second time; to send on a second voyage; as, to reship bonded merchandise.
resiance
Residence; abode.
retund
To blunt; to turn, as an edge; figuratively, to cause to be obtuse or dull; as, to retund confidence.
rete
A net or network; a plexus; particularly, a network of blood vessels or nerves, or a part resembling a network.
resublime
To sublime again.
respeak
To speak or utter again.
rest
A state of quiet or repose; a cessation from motion or labor; tranquillity; as, rest from mental exertion; rest of body or mind.
retable
A shelf behind the altar, for display of lights, vases of wlowers, etc.
retch
To make an effort to vomit; to strain, as in vomiting.
retold
Imp. & p. p. of Retell.
rethor
A rhetorician; a careful writer.
retiarius
A gladiator armed with a net for entangling his adversary and a trident for despatching him.
retrace
To trace back, as a line.
rettery
A place or establishment where flax is retted. See Ret.
revulse
To pull back with force.
reve
An officer, steward, or governor.
reunion
An assembling of persons who have been separated, as of a family, or the members of a disbanded regiment; an assembly so composed.
revamp
To vamp again; hence, to patch up; to reconstruct.
revibrate
To vibrate back or in return.
revocable
Capable of being revoked; as, a revocable edict or grant; a revocable covenant.
reword
To repeat in the same words; to reecho.
reward
To give in return, whether good or evil; -- commonly in a good sense; to requite; to recompense; to repay; to compensate.
rewin
To win again, or win back.
reyse
To go on a military expedition.
reynard
An appelation applied after the manner of a proper name to the fox. Same as Renard.
rhabdite
A minute smooth rodlike or fusiform structure found in the tissues of many Turbellaria.
rhysimeter
An instrument, acting on the principle of Pitot's tube, for measuring the velocity of a fluid current, the speed of a ship, etc.
rhinal
Og or pertaining to the nose or olfactory organs.
rhematic
Having a verb for its base; derived from a verb; as, rhematic adjectives.
rhatanhy
The powerfully astringent root of a half-shrubby Peruvian plant (Krameria triandra). It is used in medicine and to color port wine.
rhamnus
A genus of shrubs and small trees; buckthorn. The California Rhamnus Purshianus and the European R. catharticus are used in medicine.
rhaphe
The continuation of the seed stalk along the side of an anatropous ovule or seed, forming a ridge or seam.
rhea
The ramie or grass-cloth plant. See Grass-cloth plant, under Grass.
rheic
Pertaining to, or designating, an acid (commonly called chrysophanic acid) found in rhubarb (Rheum).
rhesus
A monkey; the bhunder.
rhenish
Of or pertaining to the river Rhine; as, Rhenish wine.
rheometer
An instrument for measuring currents, especially the force or intensity of electrical currents; a galvanometer.
rhetian
Pertaining to the ancient Rhaeti, or Rhaetians, or to Rhaetia, their country; as, the Rhetian Alps, now the country of Tyrol and the Grisons.
rheum
A genus of plants. See Rhubarb.
rhopalic
Applied to a line or verse in which each successive word has one more syllable than the preceding.
rhodanate
A salt of rhodanic acid; a sulphocyanate.
rhipipter
One of the Rhipiptera, a group of insects having wings which fold like a fan; a strepsipter.
rhizine
A rootlike filament or hair growing from the stems of mosses or on lichens; a rhizoid.
rhomb
An equilateral parallelogram, or quadrilateral figure whose sides are equal and the opposite sides parallel.
rhonchial
Of or pertaining to a rhonchus; produced by rhonchi.
rhus
A genus of shrubs and small treets. See Sumac.
rhubarb
The name of several large perennial herbs of the genus Rheum and order Polygonaceae.
rhumb
A line which crosses successive meridians at a constant angle; -- called also rhumb line, and loxodromic curve.
rhyme
An expression of thought in numbers, measure, or verse; a composition in verse; a rhymed tale; poetry; harmony of language.
rhyolite
A quartzose trachyte, an igneous rock often showing a fluidal structure.
ricinic
Pertaining to, or derived from, castor oil; formerly, designating an acid now called ricinoleic acid.
ribes
A genus of shrubs including gooseberries and currants of many kinds.
riant
Laughing; laughable; exciting gayety; gay; merry; delightful to the view, as a landscape.
rhythm
In the widest sense, a dividing into short portions by a regular succession of motions, impulses, sounds, accents, etc.
rial
A Spanish coin. See Real.
ribald
A low, vulgar, brutal, foul-mouthed wretch; a lewd fellow.
ribbed
Furnished or formed with ribs; as, a ribbed cylinder; ribbed cloth.
ribwort
A species of plantain (Plantago lanceolata) with long, narrow, ribbed leaves; -- called also rib grass, ripple grass, ribwort plantain.
ribibe
A sort of stringed instrument; a rebec.
ribroast
To beat soundly.
ricebird
The Java sparrow.
rich
Hence, in general, well supplied; abounding; abundant; copious; bountiful; as, a rich treasury; a rich entertainment; a rich crop.
ride
To be carried on the back of an animal, as a horse.
rictal
Of or pertaining to the rictus; as, rictal bristles.
rick
A stack or pile, as of grain, straw, or hay, in the open air, usually protected from wet with thatching.
ricochet
To operate upon by ricochet firing. See Ricochet, n.
ridable
Suitable for riding; as, a ridable horse; a ridable road.
riddance
The act of ridding or freeing; deliverance; a cleaning up or out.
ridotto
A favorite Italian public entertainment, consisting of music and dancing, -- held generally on fast eves.
ridge
The back, or top of the back; a crest.
ridicule
An object of sport or laughter; a laughingstock; a laughing matter.
rife
Prevailing; prevalent; abounding.
rietboc
The reedbuck, a South African antelope (Cervicapra arundinacea); -- so called from its frequenting dry places covered with high grass or reeds.
riffler
A curved file used in carving wool and marble.
terzetto
A composition in three voice parts; a vocal (rarely an instrumental) trio.
skute
A boat; a small vessel.
scincoid
Of or pertaining to the family Scincidae, or skinks.
rung
Imp. & p. p. of Ring.
roorbach
A defamatory forgery or falsehood published for purposes of political intrigue.
rixation
A brawl or quarrel.
riot
Wanton or unrestrained behavior; uproar; tumult.
rill
A very small brook; a streamlet.
rigid
Firm; stiff; unyielding; not pliant; not flexible.
rigel
A fixed star of the first magnitude in the left foot of the constellation Orion.
rift
An opening made by riving or splitting; a cleft; a fissure.
rigadoon
A gay, lively dance for one couple, -- said to have been borrowed from Provence in France.
rigger
One who rigs or dresses; one whose occupation is to fit the rigging of a ship.
right
Straight; direct; not crooked; as, a right line.
rigsdaler
A Danish coin worth about fifty-four cents. It was the former unit of value in Denmark.
rigmarole
A succession of confused or nonsensical statements; foolish talk; nonsense.
rigol
A circle; hence, a diadem.
riksdaler
A Swedish coin worth about twenty-seven cents. It was formerly the unit of value in Sweden.
rile
To render turbid or muddy; to stir up; to roil.
rimple
A fold or wrinkle. See Rumple.
rime
A rent or long aperture; a chink; a fissure; a crack.
rima
A narrow and elongated aperture; a cleft; a fissure.
rimbase
A short cylinder connecting a trunnion with the body of a cannon. See Illust. of Cannon.
rimmer
An implement for cutting, trimming, or ornamenting the rim of anything, as the edges of pies, etc.; also, a reamer.
rimose
Full of rimes, fissures, or chinks.
ring
To cause to sound, especially by striking, as a metallic body; as, to ring a bell.
rimy
Abounding with rime; frosty.
rind
The external covering or coat, as of flesh, fruit, trees, etc.; skin; hide; bark; peel; shell.
rink
The smooth and level extent of ice marked off for the game of curling.
rinse
To wash lightly; to cleanse with a second or repeated application of water after washing.
risk
Hazard; danger; peril; exposure to loss, injury, or destruction.
riprap
A foundation or sustaining wall of stones thrown together without order, as in deep water or on a soft bottom.
ripienist
A player in the ripieno portion of an orchestra. See Ripieno.
riparian
Of or pertaining to the bank of a river; as, riparian rights.
ripe
The bank of a river.
ripost
In fencing, a return thrust after a parry.
ripper
One who, or that which, rips; a ripping tool.
rise
To ascend or float in a fluid, as gases or vapors in air, cork in water, and the like.
ripsaw
A handsaw with coarse teeth which have but a slight set, used for cutting wood in the direction of the fiber; -- called also ripping saw.
riptowel
A gratuity given to tenants after they had reaped their lord's corn.
rish
A rush (the plant).
risibility
The quality of being risible; as, risibility is peculiar to the human species.
ritornello
A short return or repetition; a concluding symphony to an air, often consisting of the burden of the song.
rist
3d pers. sing. pres. of Rise, contracted from riseth.
risorial
Pertaining to, or producing, laughter; as, the risorial muscles.
rissoid
Any one of very numerous species of small spiral gastropods of the genus Rissoa, or family Rissoidae, found both in fresh and salt water.
ritardando
Retarding; -- a direction for slower time; rallentado.
ritenuto
Held back; holding back; ritardando.
rive
To rend asunder by force; to split; to cleave; as, to rive timber for rails or shingles.
ritual
Of or pertaining to rites or ritual; as, ritual service or sacrifices; the ritual law.
rivage
A bank, shore, or coast.
rivose
Marked with sinuate and irregular furrows.
rivulet
A small stream or brook; a streamlet.
roed
Filled with roe.
roborant
A strengthening medicine; a tonic.
roan
Having a bay, chestnut, brown, or black color, with gray or white thickly interspersed; -- said of a horse.
roach
A European fresh-water fish of the Carp family (Leuciscus rutilus). It is silver-white, with a greenish back.
rixdaler
A Dutch silver coin, worth about $1.00.
rizzar
To dry in the sun; as, rizzared haddock.
road
A journey, or stage of a journey.
roam
To go from place to place without any certain purpose or direction; to rove; to wander.
robber
One who robs; in law, one who feloniously takes goods or money from the person of another by violence or by putting him in fear.
roar
To cry with a full, loud, continued sound.
roast
To cook by surrounding with hot embers, ashes, sand, etc.; as, to roast a potato in ashes.
robe
An outer garment; a dress of a rich, flowing, and elegant style or make; hence, a dress of state, rank, office, or the like.
robin
A small European singing bird (Erythacus rubecula), having a reddish breast; -- called also robin redbreast, robinet, and ruddock.
rocoa
The orange-colored pulp covering the seeds of the tropical plant Bixa Orellana, from which annotto is prepared.
roccellic
Pertaining to, or designating, a dibasic acid of the oxalic series found in archil (Roccella tinctoria, etc.
robust
Evincing strength; indicating vigorous health; strong; sinewy; muscular; vigorous; sound; as, a robust body; robust youth; robust health.
rocambole
A name of Allium Scorodoprasum and A. Ascalonium, two kinds of garlic, the latter of which is also called shallot.
rochelime
Lime in the lump after it is burned; quicklime.
rock
A distaff used in spinning; the staff or frame about which flax is arranged, and from which the thread is drawn in spinning.
rodomel
Juice of roses mixed with honey.
roddy
Full of rods or twigs.
rode
Redness; complexion.
rodsman
One who carries and holds a leveling staff, or rod, in a surveying party.
roebuck
A small European and Asiatic deer (Capreolus capraea) having erect, cylindrical, branched antlers, forked at the summit.
romeite
A mineral of a hyacinth or honey-yellow color, occuring in square octahedrons. It is an antimonate of calcium.
roister
To bluster; to swagger; to bully; to be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent.
rohob
An inspissated juice. See Rob.
rogation
The demand, by the consuls or tribunes, of a law to be passed by the people; a proposed law or decree.
rogue
A vagrant; an idle, sturdy beggar; a vagabond; a tramp.
roil
To render turbid by stirring up the dregs or sediment of; as, to roil wine, cider, etc. , in casks or bottles; to roil a spring.
roin
A scab; a scurf, or scurfy spot.
roll
To bind or involve by winding, as in a bandage; to inwrap; -- often with up; as, to roll up a parcel.
roke
Mist; smoke; damp
roky
Misty; foggy; cloudy.
romaic
Of or relating to modern Greece, and especially to its language.
rombowline
Old, condemned canvas, rope, etc., unfit for use except in chafing gear.
ronyon
A mangy or scabby creature.
ronchil
An American marine food fish (Bathymaster signatus) of the North Pacific coast, allied to the tilefish.
romic
A method of notation for all spoken sounds, proposed by Mr. Sweet; -- so called because it is based on the common Roman-letter alphabet.
romp
To play rudely and boisterously; to leap and frisk about in play.
rondache
A circular shield carried by foot soldiers.
rong
Imp. & p. p. of Ring.
roof
That which resembles, or corresponds to, the covering or the ceiling of a house; as, the roof of a cavern; the roof of the mouth.
ronnen
Obs. p. p. of Renne, to run.
rood
A representation in sculpture or in painting of the cross with Christ hanging on it.
room
A particular portion of space appropriated for occupancy; a place to sit, stand, or lie; a seat.
rook
Mist; fog. See Roke.
roon
Vermilion red; red.
roytish
Wild; irregular.
rotgut
Any bad spirituous liquor, especially when adulterated so as to be very deleterious.
rose
A flower and shrub of any species of the genus Rosa, of which there are many species, mostly found in the morthern hemispere
roquelaure
A cloak reaching about to, or just below, the knees, worn in the 18th century.
rope
A large, stout cord, usually one not less than an inch in circumference, made of strands twisted or braided together.
roost
See Roust, v. t.
root
To turn up the earth with the snout, as swine.
ropily
In a ropy manner; in a viscous or glutinous manner.
ropy
Capable of being drawn into a thread, as a glutinous substance; stringy; viscous; tenacious; glutinous; as ropy sirup; ropy lees.
rorulent
Full of, or abounding in, dew.
roral
Of or pertaining to dew; consisting of dew; dewy.
roric
Of or pertaining to dew; resembling dew; dewy.
rosaceous
Like a rose in shape or appearance; as, a rosaceous corolla.
roscid
Containing, or consisting of, dew; dewy.
rostel
Same as Rostellum.
rosmarine
Dew from the sea; sea dew.
rosied
Decorated with roses, or with the color of roses.
rosland
Heathy land; land full of heather; moorish or watery land.
rosolic
Pertaining to, or designating, a complex red dyestuff (called rosolic acid) which is analogous to rosaniline and aurin.
ross
The rough, scaly matter on the surface of the bark of trees.
rota
An ecclesiastical court of Rome, called also Rota Romana, that takes cognizance of suits by appeal. It consists of twelve members.
rosulate
Arranged in little roselike clusters; -- said of leaves and bracts.
rosy
Resembling a rose in color, form, or qualities; blooming; red; blushing; also, adorned with roses.
rotchet
The European red gurnard (Trigla pini).
rote
A kind of guitar, the notes of which were produced by a small wheel or wheel-like arrangement; an instrument similar to the hurdy-gurdy.
rout
To roar; to bellow; to snort; to snore loudly.
rouge
A red amorphous powder consisting of ferric oxide.  It is used in polishing glass, metal, or gems, and as a cosmetic, etc.
rotula
The patella, or kneepan.
rotifer
One of the Rotifera. See Illust. in Appendix.
rotten
Having rotted; putrid; decayed; as, a rotten apple; rotten meat.
rouble
A coin. See Ruble.
roue
One devoted to a life of sensual pleasure; a debauchee; a rake.
rounceval
Large; strong; -- from the gigantic bones shown at Roncesvalles, and alleged to be those of old heroes.
rouk
See 5th Ruck, and Roke.
rouleau
A little roll; a roll of coins put up in paper, or something resembling such a roll.
roup
To cry or shout; hence, to sell by auction.
rousant
Rising; -- applied to a bird in the attitude of rising; also, sometmes, to a bird in profile with wings addorsed.
rowdy
One who engages in rows, or noisy quarrels; a ruffianly fellow.
roving
A roll or sliver of wool or cotton drawn out and slightly twisted; a rove. See 2d Rove, 2.
roux
A thickening, made of flour, for soups and gravies.
rove
To draw through an eye or aperture.
rowable
That may be rowed, or rowed upon.
rowboat
A boat designed to be propelled by oars instead of sails.
roxburgh
A style of bookbinding in which the back is plain leather, the sides paper or cloth, the top gilt-edged, but the front and bottom left uncut.
rowed
Formed into a row, or rows; having a row, or rows; as, a twelve-rowed ear of corn.
rowport
An opening in the side of small vessels of war, near the surface of the water, to facilitate rowing in calm weather.
royne
To bite; to gnaw.
royal
Noble; generous; magnificent; princely.
roysterer
Same as Roister, Roisterer.
ruga
A wrinkle; a fold; as, the rugae of the stomach.
ructation
The act of belching wind.
rubstone
A stone for scouring or rubbing; a whetstone; a rub.
rubelle
A red color used in enameling.
rubato
Robbed; borrowed.
rubber
One who, or that which, rubs.
rubiacin
A substance found in madder root, and probably identical with ruberythrinic acid.
rubric
That part of any work in the early manuscripts and typography which was colored red, to distinguish it from other portions.
rucervine
Of, like, or pertaining to, a deer of the genus Rucervus, which includes the swamp deer of India.
rubus
A genus of rosaceous plants, including the raspberry and blackberry.
ruby
A precious stone of a carmine red color, sometimes verging to violet, or intermediate between carmine and hyacinth red.
ruche
A pile of arched tiles, used to catch and retain oyster spawn.
ruck
To draw into wrinkles or unsightly folds; to crease; as, to ruck up a carpet.
ruelle
A private circle or assembly at a private house; a circle.
rudiment
That which is unformed or undeveloped; the principle which lies at the bottom of any development; an unfinished beginning.
rudder
A riddle or sieve.
rude
Characterized by roughness; umpolished; raw; lacking delicacy or refinement; coarse.
rudmasday
Either of the feasts of the Holy Cross, occuring on May 3 and September 14, annually.
rueful
Causing one to rue or lament; woeful; mournful; sorrowful.
rufiopin
A yellowish red crystalline substance related to anthracene, and obtained from opianic acid.
rufescent
Reddish; tinged with red.
ruff
A game similar to whist, and the predecessor of it.
rufol
A phenol derivative of anthracene obtained as a white crystalline substance, which on oxidation produces a red dyestuff related to anthraquinone.
ruft
Eructation; belching.
rumble
To make a low, heavy, continued sound; as, the thunder rumbles at a distance.
rukh
A large bird, supposed by some to be the same as the extinct Epiornis of Madagascar.
rugosa
An extinct tribe of fossil corals, including numerous species, many of them of large size.  They are characteristic of the Paleozoic formations.
rugged
Not neat or regular; uneven.
rugine
An instrument for scraping the periosteum from bones; a raspatory.
rugulose
Somewhat rugose.
ruin
The act of falling or tumbling down; fall.
ruling
Predominant; chief; reigning; controlling; as, a ruling passion; a ruling sovereign.
rulable
That may be ruled; subject to rule; accordant or conformable to rule.
rule
Uniform or established course of things.
rullichies
Chopped meat stuffed into small bags of tripe. They are cut in slices and fried.
ruly
Orderly; easily restrained; -- opposed to unruly.
rumor
A flying or popular report; the common talk; hence, public fame; notoriety.
rumkin
A popular or jocular name for a drinking vessel.
rumen
The first stomach of ruminants; the paunch; the fardingbag. See Illust. below. 
rumicin
A yellow crystalline substance found in the root of yellow dock (Rumex crispus) and identical with chrysophanic acid.
rummage
A searching carefully by looking into every corner, and by turning things over.
rumney
A sort of Spanish wine.
runagate
A fugitive; a vagabond; an apostate; a renegade. See Renegade.
rump
The end of the backbone of an animal, with the parts adjacent; the buttock or buttocks.
rumseller
One who sells rum; one who deals in intoxicating liquors; especially, one who sells spirituous beverages at retail.
rundel
A moat with water in it; also, a small stream; a runlet.
runch
The wild radish.
rune
Old Norse poetry expressed in runes.
sangu
The Abyssinian ox (Bos / Bibos, Africanus), noted for the great length of its horns. It has a hump on its back.
sadness
Heaviness; firmness.
rutylene
A liquid hydrocarbon, C10H18, of the acetylene series. It is produced artificially.
ruricolist
An inhabitant of the country.
runt
Any animal which is unusually small, as compared with others of its kind; -- applied particularly to domestic animals.
runnel
A rivulet or small brook.
runic
Of or pertaining to a rune, to runes, or to the Norsemen; as, runic verses; runic letters; runic names; runic rhyme.
runlet
A little run or stream; a streamlet; a brook.
runology
The science of runes.
runround
A felon or whitlow.
rupial
Of or pertaining to rupia.
runway
The channel of a stream.
rupee
A silver coin, and money of account, in the East Indies.
ruption
A breaking or bursting open; breach; rupture.
rural
Of or pertaining to agriculture; as, rural economy.
russ
A Russian, or the Russians.
rusine
Of, like, or pertaining to, a deer of the genus Rusa, which includes the sambur deer (Rusa Aristotelis) of India.
ruse
An artifice; trick; stratagem; wile; fraud; deceit.
rush
A name given to many aquatic or marsh-growing endogenous plants with soft, slender stems, as the species of Juncus and Scirpus.
rusk
A kind of light, soft bread made with yeast and eggs, often toasted or crisped in an oven; or, a kind of sweetened biscuit.
rusma
A depilatory made of orpiment and quicklime, and used by the Turks. See Rhusma.
ruth
Sorrow for the misery of another; pity; tenderness.
rust
That which resembles rust in appearance or effects.
rutate
A salt of rutic acid.
rutic
Pertaining to, or obtained from, rue (Ruta); as, rutic acid, now commonly called capric acid.
rutter
A horseman or trooper.
sabot
A kind of wooden shoe worn by the peasantry in France, Belgium, Sweden, and some other European countries.
sabadilla
A Mexican liliaceous plant (Schoenocaulon officinale); also, its seeds, which contain the alkaloid veratrine.
rynd
A piece of iron crossing the hole in the upper millstone by which the stone is supported on the spindle.
ryal
See Rial, an old English coin.
ryder
A clause added to a document; a rider. See Rider.
ryot
A peasant or cultivator of the soil.
rytina
A genus of large edentulous sirenians, allied to the dugong and manatee, including but one species (R.
sabre
A sword with a broad and heavy blade, thick at the back, and usually more or less curved like a scimiter; a cavalry sword.
sabbat
In mediaeval demonology, the nocturnal assembly in which demons and sorcerers were thought to celebrate their orgies.
sabella
A genus of tubicolous annelids having a circle of plumose gills around the head.
sabian
Of or pertaining to Saba in Arabia, celebrated for producing aromatic plants.
sable
The fur of the sable.
sack
A name formerly given to various dry Spanish wines.
saccade
A sudden, violent check of a horse by drawing or twitching the reins on a sudden and with one pull.
sabulose
Growing in sandy places.
sacalait
A kind of fresh-water bass; the crappie.
sacellum
An unroofed space consecrated to a divinity.
sachem
A chief of a tribe of the American Indians; a sagamore.
sadda
A work in the Persian tongue, being a summary of the Zend-Avesta, or sacred books.
sacral
Of or pertaining to the sacrum; in the region of the sacrum.
sacs
A tribe of Indians, which, together with the Foxes, formerly occupied the region about Green Bay, Wisconsin.
sadiron
An iron for smoothing clothes; a flatiron.
sadh
A member of a monotheistic sect of Hindoos. Sadhs resemble the Quakers in many respects.
sadly
Wearily; heavily; firmly.
sakti
The divine energy, personified as the wife of a deity (Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, etc.); the female principle.
saheb
A respectful title or appellation given to Europeans of rank.
sage
A suffruticose labiate plant (Salvia officinalis) with grayish green foliage, much used in flavoring meats, etc.
safflower
An annual composite plant (Carthamus tinctorius), the flowers of which are used as a dyestuff and in making rouge; bastard, or false, saffron.
sadr
A plant of the genus Ziziphus (Z. lotus); -- so called by the Arabs of Barbary, who use its berries for food.
safe
Incapable of doing harm; no longer dangerous; in secure care or custody; as, the prisoner is safe.
safranin
An orange-red dyestuff extracted from the saffron.
sagacious
Of quick sense perceptions; keen-scented; skilled in following a trail.
sagoin
A marmoset; -- called also sagouin.
sagger
A pot or case of fire clay, in which fine stoneware is inclosed while baking in the kiln; a seggar.
saginate
To make fat; to pamper.
sagum
The military cloak of the Roman soldiers.
sagy
Full of sage; seasoned with sage.
saimir
The squirrel monkey.
saic
A kind of ketch very common in the Levant, which has neither topgallant sail nor mizzen topsail.
sahibah
A lady; mistress.
saibling
A European mountain trout (Salvelinus alpinus); -- called also Bavarian charr.
said
Imp. & p. p. of Say.
sail
An extent of canvas or other fabric by means of which the wind is made serviceable as a power for propelling vessels through the water.
saiva
One of an important religious sect in India which regards Siva with peculiar veneration.
sain
To sanctify; to bless so as to protect from evil influence.
saith
3d pers. sing. pres. of Say.
saker
A falcon (Falco sacer) native of Southern Europe and Asia, closely resembling the lanner.
saki
Any one of several species of South American monkeys of the genus Pithecia. They have large ears, and a long hairy tail which is not prehensile.
samara
A dry, indehiscent, usually one-seeded, winged fruit, as that of the ash, maple, and elm; a key or key fruit.
salol
A white crystalline substance consisting of phenol salicylate.
salian
Denoting a tribe of Franks who established themselves early in the fourth century on the river Sala [now Yssel]; Salic.
salaam
To make or perform a salam.
sale
Opportunity of selling; demand; market.
sallenders
An eruption on the hind leg of a horse.
salmagundi
A mixture of chopped meat and pickled herring, with oil, vinegar, pepper, and onions.
salt
Hence, flavor; taste; savor; smack; seasoning.
salp
Any species of Salpa, or of the family Salpidae.
salse
A mud volcano, the water of which is often impregnated with salts, whence the name.
salubrious
Favorable to health; healthful; promoting health; as, salubrious air, water, or climate.
salvable
Capable of being saved; admitting of salvation.
samp
An article of food consisting of maize broken or bruised, which is cooked by boiling, and usually eaten with milk; coarse hominy.
samian
Of or pertaining to the island of Samos.
sambo
A colloquial or humorous appellation for a negro; sometimes, the offspring of a black person and a mulatto; a zambo.
same
Not different or other; not another or others; identical; unchanged.
sammier
A machine for pressing the water from skins in tanning.
samoan
Of or pertaining to the Samoan Islands (formerly called Navigators' Islands) in the South Pacific Ocean, or their inhabitants.
sanbenito
Anciently, a sackcloth coat worn by penitents on being reconciled to the church.
samshu
A spirituous liquor distilled by the Chinese from the yeasty liquor in which boiled rice has fermented under pressure.
sanability
The quality or state of being sanable; sanableness; curableness.
sand
A single particle of such stone.
sanctified
Made holy; also, made to have the air of sanctity; sanctimonious.
sane
Being in a healthy condition; not deranged; acting rationally; -- said of the mind.
saunter
To wander or walk about idly and in a leisurely or lazy manner; to lounge; to stroll; to loiter.
sard
A variety of carnelian, of a rich reddish yellow or brownish red color. See the Note under Chalcedony.
saphead
A weak-minded, stupid fellow; a milksop.
sankha
A chank shell (Turbinella pyrum); also, a shell bracelet or necklace made in India from the chank shell.
sanhedrim
The great council of the Jews, which consisted of seventy members, to whom the high priest was added.
sanguinity
The quality of being sanguine; sanguineness.
sanguisuge
A bloodsucker, or leech.
sanicle
Any plant of the umbelliferous genus Sanicula, reputed to have healing powers.
sanjak
A district or a subvision of a vilayet.
santal
A colorless crystalline substance, isomeric with piperonal, but having weak acid properties. It is extracted from sandalwood.
sannup
A male Indian; a brave; -- correlative of squaw.
sans
Without; deprived or destitute of. Rarely used as an English word.
sapajou
Any one of several species of South American monkeys of the genus Cebus, having long and prehensile tails.
sapful
Abounding in sap; sappy.
sapsago
A kind of Swiss cheese, of a greenish color, flavored with melilot.
sapodilla
A tall, evergeen, tropical American tree (Achras Sapota); also, its edible fruit, the sapodilla plum.
sapid
Having the power of affecting the organs of taste; possessing savor, or flavor.
sapless
Destitute of sap; not juicy.
sapper
One who saps; specifically (Mil.), one who is employed in working at saps, building and repairing fortifications, and the like.
saprophyte
Any plant growing on decayed animal or vegetable matter, as most fungi and some flowering plants with no green color, as the Indian pipe.
sarcasm
A keen, reproachful expression; a satirical remark uttered with some degree of scorn or contempt; a taunt; a gibe; a cutting jest.
sapucaia
A Brazilian tree. See Lecythis, and Monkey-pot.
sarabaite
One of certain vagrant or heretical Oriental monks in the early church.
sarcoderma
A fleshy covering of a seed, lying between the external and internal integuments.
sarcodic
Of or pertaining to sarcode.
sasin
The Indian antelope (Antilope bezoartica, / cervicapra), noted for its beauty and swiftness. It has long, spiral, divergent horns.
sarong
A sort of petticoat worn by both sexes in Java and the Malay Archipelago.
sark
To cover with sarking, or thin boards.
sargasso
The gulf weed. See under Gulf.
sarigue
A small South American opossum (Didelphys opossum), having four white spots on the face.
sarmatic
Of or pertaining to Sarmatia, or its inhabitants, the ancestors of the Russians and the Poles.
sarn
A pavement or stepping-stone.
sarse
A fine sieve; a searce.
sarplar
A large bale or package of wool, containing eighty tods, or 2,240 pounds, in weight.
sarracenia
A genus of American perennial herbs growing in bogs; the American pitcher plant.
sart
An assart, or clearing.
sash
To adorn with a sash or scarf.
satrap
The governor of a province in ancient Persia; hence, a petty autocrat despot.
satchel
A little sack or bag for carrying papers, books, or small articles of wearing apparel; a hand bag.
sassabye
A large African antelope (Alcelaphus lunata), similar to the hartbeest, but having its horns regularly curved.
satan
The grand adversary of man; the Devil, or Prince of darkness; the chief of the fallen angels; the archfiend.
sate
To satisfy the desire or appetite of; to satiate; to glut; to surfeit.
satiate
Filled to satiety; glutted; sated; -- followed by with or of.
sauce
Any garden vegetables eaten with meat.
saturable
Capable of being saturated; admitting of saturation.
satyr
A sylvan deity or demigod, represented as part man and part goat, and characterized by riotous merriment and lasciviousness.
sauh
Imp. sing. of See.
sauerkraut
Cabbage cut fine and allowed to ferment in a brine made of its own juice with salt, -- a German dish.
saulie
A hired mourner at a funeral.
scad
A small carangoid fish (Trachurus saurus) abundant on the European coast, and less common on the American.
sawhorse
A kind of rack, shaped like a double St. Andrew's cross, on which sticks of wood are laid for sawing by hand; -- called also buck, and sawbuck.
savine
A coniferous shrub (Juniperus Sabina) of Western Asia, occasionally found also in the northern parts of the United States and in British America.
saute
P. p. of Sauter.
saur
Soil; dirt; dirty water; urine from a cowhouse.
sausage
A saucisson. See Saucisson.
savable
Capable of, or admitting of, being saved.
save
The herb sage, or salvia.
sawder
A corrupt spelling and pronunciation of solder.
savor
Hence, specific flavor or quality; characteristic property; distinctive temper, tinge, taint, and the like.
sawbones
A nickname for a surgeon.
sawer
One who saws; a sawyer.
sawfish
Any one of several species of elasmobranch fishes of the genus Pristis. They have a sharklike form, but are more nearly allied to the rays.
saxon
Also used in the sense of Anglo-Saxon.
sawyer
One whose occupation is to saw timber into planks or boards, or to saw wood for fuel; a sawer.
sawmill
A mill for sawing, especially one for sawing timber or lumber.
sawtooth
An arctic seal (Lobodon carcinophaga), having the molars serrated; -- called also crab-eating seal.
saxatile
Of or pertaining to rocks; living among rocks; as, a saxatile plant.
saxicavid
Of or pertaining to the saxicavas.
saymaster
A master of assay; one who tries or proves.
sayer
One who says; an utterer.
saying
That which is said; a declaration; a statement, especially a proverbial one; an aphorism; a proverb.
saynd
P. p. of Senge, to singe.
scab
An incrustation over a sore, wound, vesicle, or pustule, formed by the drying up of the discharge from the diseased part.
scelerat
A villain; a criminal.
scape
A peduncle rising from the ground or from a subterranean stem, as in the stemless violets, the bloodroot, and the like.
scala
A machine formerly employed for reducing dislocations of the humerus.
scaffold
Specifically, a stage or elevated platform for the execution of a criminal; as, to die on the scaffold.
scaglia
A reddish variety of limestone.
scamble
To move awkwardly; to be shuffling, irregular, or unsteady; to sprawl; to shamble.
scan
To mount by steps; to go through with step by step.
scat
Go away; begone; away; -- chiefly used in driving off a cat.
scar
A mark left upon a stem or branch by the fall of a leaf, leaflet, or frond, or upon a seed by the separation of its support.
scasely
Scarcely; hardly.
scaup
A bed or stratum of shellfish; scalp.
scavage
A toll or duty formerly exacted of merchant strangers by mayors, sheriffs, etc., for goods shown or offered for sale within their precincts.
schlich
The finer portion of a crushed ore, as of gold, lead, or tin, separated by the water in certain wet processes.
scern
To discern; to perceive.
scena
A scene in an opera.
scepsis
Skepticism; skeptical philosophy.
schediasm
Cursory writing on a loose sheet.
schiedam
Holland gin made at Schiedam in the Netherlands.
sciaenoid
Of or pertaining to the Sciaenidae, a family of marine fishes which includes the meagre, the squeteague, and the kingfish.
schmelze
A kind of glass of a red or ruby color, made in Bohemia.
scholar
One who attends a school; one who learns of a teacher; one under the tuition of a preceptor; a pupil; a disciple; a learner; a student.
scilicet
To wit; namely; videlicet; -- often abbreviated to sc., or ss.
science
Knowledge; knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts.
scimitar
A saber with a much curved blade having the edge on the convex side, -- in use among Mohammedans, esp.
shard
A piece or fragment of an earthen vessel, or a like brittle substance, as the shell of an egg or snail.
sejeant
Sitting, as a lion or other beast.
sean
A seine. See Seine.
scrub
To rub anything hard, especially with a wet brush; to scour; hence, to be diligent and penurious; as, to scrub hard for a living.
sconce
A fortification, or work for defense; a fort.
scoat
To prop; to scotch.
scise
To cut; to penetrate.
sciolism
The knowledge of a sciolist; superficial knowledge.
scirrhoid
Resembling scirrhus.
sciurine
Of or pertaining to the Squirrel family.
scleragogy
Severe discipline.
scoke
Poke (Phytolacca decandra).
scobiform
Having the form of, or resembling, sawdust or raspings.
scoff
Derision; ridicule; mockery; derisive or mocking expression of scorn, contempt, or reproach.
scold
To chide with rudeness and clamor; to rate; also, to rebuke or reprove with severity.
scomber
A genus of acanthopterygious fishes which includes the common mackerel.
scovel
A mop for sweeping ovens; a malkin.
scorch
To affect painfully with heat, or as with heat; to dry up with heat; to affect as by heat.
scoop
A large ladle; a vessel with a long handle, used for dipping liquids; a utensil for bailing boats.
scoparin
A yellow gelatinous or crystalline substance found in broom (Cytisus scoparius) accompanying sparteine.
scot
A name for a horse.
scoundrel
A mean, worthless fellow; a rascal; a villain; a man without honor or virtue.
screable
Capable of being spit out.
scow
A large flat-bottomed boat, having broad, square ends.
scrabble
To scrape, paw, or scratch with the hands; to proceed by clawing with the hands and feet; to scramble; as, to scrabble up a cliff or a tree.
scribable
Capable of being written, or of being written upon.
scrobicula
One of the smooth areas surrounding the tubercles of a sea urchin.
scye
Arm scye, a cutter's term for the armhole or part of the armhole of the waist of a garnment.
scum
Refuse; recrement; anything vile or worthless.
scuff
The back part of the neck; the scruff.
scry
A flock of wild fowl.
scud
To move swiftly; especially, to move as if driven forward by something.
scug
A place of shelter; the declivity of a hill.
sculker
See Skulk, Skulker.
scur
To move hastily; to scour.
scunner
To cause to loathe, or feel disgust at.
scup
A marine sparoid food fish (Stenotomus chrysops, or S. argyrops), common on the Atlantic coast of the United States.
scut
The tail of a hare, or of a deer, or other animal whose tail is short, sp. when carried erect; hence, sometimes, the animal itself.
scybala
Hardened masses of feces.
seafarer
One who follows the sea as a business; a mariner; a sailor.
scythe
A scythe-shaped blade attached to ancient war chariots.
scyle
To hide; to secrete; to conceal.
scypha
See Scyphus, 2 (b).
seabeach
A beach lying along the sea.
seacoast
The shore or border of the land adjacent to the sea or ocean. Also used adjectively.
seak
Soap prepared for use in milling cloth.
seagirt
Surrounded by the water of the sea or ocean; as, a seagirt isle.
seah
A Jewish dry measure containing one third of an an ephah.
seal
Any aquatic carnivorous mammal of the families Phocidae and Otariidae.
seam
Grease; tallow; lard.
seduce
To draw aside from the path of rectitude and duty in any manner; to entice to evil; to lead astray; to tempt and lead to iniquity; to corrupt.
secale
A genus of cereal grasses including rye.
seavy
Overgrown with rushes.
sear
To wither; to dry up.
seapiece
A picture representing a scene at sea; a marine picture.
seaquake
A quaking of the sea.
seascape
A picture representing a scene at sea.
seat
The place or thing upon which one sits; hence; anything made to be sat in or upon, as a chair, bench, stool, saddle, or the like.
sebesten
The mucilaginous drupaceous fruit of two East Indian trees (Cordia Myxa, and C. latifolia), sometimes used medicinally in pectoral diseases.
seawant
The name used by the Algonquin Indians for the shell beads which passed among the Indians as money.
sebat
The eleventh month of the ancient Hebrew year, approximately corresponding with February.
sebiferous
Producing vegetable tallow.
seborrhea
A morbidly increased discharge of sebaceous matter upon the skin; stearrhea.
sect
A cutting; a scion.
seclude
To shut up apart from others; to withdraw into, or place in, solitude; to separate from society or intercourse with others.
seceder
One who secedes.
seck
Barren; unprofitable. See Rent seck, under Rent.
second
Immediately following the first; next to the first in order of place or time; hence, occuring again; another; other.
secre
Secret; secretive; faithful to a secret.
sedent
Sitting; inactive; quiet.
secular
Coming or observed once in an age or a century.
sedan
A portable chair or covered vehicle for carrying a single person, -- usually borne on poles by two men.
sedge
Any plant of the genus Carex, perennial, endogenous herbs, often growing in dense tufts in marshy places.
sedilia
Seats in the chancel of a church near the altar for the officiating clergy during intervals of service.
seggar
A case or holder made of fire clay, in which fine pottery is inclosed while baking in the kin.
sipe
To run or soak through fine pores and interstices; to ooze.
seel
To close the eyes of (a hawk or other bird) by drawing through the lids threads which were fastened over the head.
seed
A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more integuments, or coverings; as, an apple seed; a currant seed.
seek
To go in search of; to look for; to search for; to try to find.
seem
To befit; to beseem.
seen
Versed; skilled; accomplished.
seer
A person who foresees events; a prophet.
sipage
Water that seeped or oozed through a porous soil.
sipy
Oozy; -- applied to land under cultivation that is not well drained.
seesaw
A plank or board adjusted for this play.
seethe
To decoct or prepare for food in hot liquid; to boil; as, to seethe flesh.
seid
A descendant of Mohammed through his daughter Fatima and nephew Ali.
sego
A liliaceous plant (Calochortus Nuttallii) of Western North America, and its edible bulb; -- so called by the Ute Indians and the Mormons.
segment
A piece in the form of the sector of a circle, or part of a ring; as, the segment of a sectional fly wheel or flywheel rim.
segnity
Sluggishness; dullness; inactivity.
segregate
Separate; select.
seiches
Local oscillations in level observed in the case of some lakes, as Lake Geneva.
seirospore
One of several spores arranged in a chain as in certain algae of the genus Callithamnion.
seigh
Obs. imp. sing. of See. Saw.
seiner
One who fishes with a seine.
seity
Something peculiar to one's self.
seismal
Of or pertaining to an earthquake; caused by an earthquake.
seizable
That may be seized.
serolin
A peculiar fatty substance found in the blood, probably a mixture of fats, cholesterin, etc.
senecas
A tribe of Indians who formerly inhabited a part of Western New York. This tribe was the most numerous and most warlike of the Five Nations.
semblable
Like; similar; resembling.
select
To choose and take from a number; to take by preference from among others; to pick out; to cull; as, to select the best authors for perusal.
selachian
One of the Selachii. See Illustration in Appendix.
sejunction
The act of disjoining, or the state of being disjoined.
sekes
A place in a pagan temple in which the images of the deities were inclosed.
selcouth
Rarely known; unusual; strange.
seld
Rare; uncommon; unusual.
sell
A cell; a house.
self
Hence, personal interest, or love of private interest; selfishness; as, self is his whole aim.
selion
A short piece of land in arable ridges and furrows, of uncertain quantity; also, a ridge of land lying between two furrows.
selvedge
The edge of cloth which is woven in such a manner as to prevent raveling.
semaphore
A signal telegraph; an apparatus for giving signals by the disposition of lanterns, flags, oscillating arms, etc.
seminist
A believer in the old theory that the newly created being is formed by the admixture of the seed of the male with the supposed seed of the female.
semele
A daughter of Cadmus, and by Zeus mother of Bacchus.
seme
Sprinkled or sown; -- said of field, or a charge, when strewed or covered with small charges.
semiology
The science or art of signs.
semiacid
Slightly acid; subacid.
semnifical
Forming or producing seed, or the male generative product of animals or of plants.
semuncia
A Roman coin equivalent to one twenty-fourth part of a Roman pound.
semolina
The fine, hard parts of wheat, rounded by the attrition of the millstones, -- used in cookery.
sempre
Always; throughout; as, sempre piano, always soft.
senary
Of six; belonging to six; containing six.
send
To cause to go in any manner; to dispatch; to commission or direct to go; as, to send a messenger.
sepia
The common European cuttlefish.
sentential
Comprising sentences; as, a sentential translation.
senocular
Having six eyes.
senile
Of or pertaining to old age; proceeding from, or characteristic of, old age; affected with the infirmities of old age; as, senile weakness.
senna
The plants themselves, native to the East, but now cultivated largely in the south of Europe and in the West Indies.
sensate
To feel or apprehend more or less distinctly through a sense, or the senses; as, to sensate light, or an odor.
sent
See Scent, v. & n.
sepal
A leaf or division of the calyx.
sentiency
The quality or state of being sentient; esp., the quality or state of having sensation.
senza
Without; as, senza stromenti, without instruments.
sepelible
Admitting of burial.
sephen
A large sting ray of the genus Trygon, especially T. sephen of the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea. The skin is an article of commerce.
seraglio
An inclosure; a place of separation.
sept
A clan, tribe, or family, proceeding from a common progenitor; -- used especially of the ancient clans in Ireland.
seposit
To set aside; to give up.
sepsin
A soluble poison (ptomaine) present in putrid blood. It is also formed in the putrefaction of proteid matter in general.
sepulchre
The place in which the dead body of a human being is interred, or a place set apart for that purpose; a grave; a tomb.
sequacious
Inclined to follow a leader; following; attendant.
serge
A woolen twilled stuff, much used as material for clothing for both sexes.
sere
Dry; withered. Same as Sear.
serf
A servant or slave employed in husbandry, and in some countries attached to the soil and transferred with it, as formerly in Russia.
serjeantcy
See Sergeant, Sergeantcy, etc.
serial
Of or pertaining to a series; consisting of a series; appearing in successive parts or numbers; as, a serial work or publication.
sermon
A discourse or address; a talk; a writing; as, the sermons of Chaucer.
sewe
To perform the duties of a sewer. See 3d Sewer.
setback
A backset; a countercurrent; an eddy.
sesamoid
Resembling in shape the seeds of sesame.
sertularia
A genus of delicate branching hydroids having small sessile hydrothecae along the sides of the branches.
serpens
A constellation represented as a serpent held by Serpentarius.
serr
To crowd, press, or drive together.
serum
The watery portion of certain animal fluids, as blood, milk, etc.
servable
Capable of being served.
sess
To lay a tax upon; to assess.
sesban
A leguminous shrub (Sesbania aculeata) which furnishes a fiber used for making ropes.
sesquisalt
A salt derived from a sesquioxide base, or made up on the proportions of a sesqui compound.
sestet
A piece of music composed for six voices or six instruments; a sextet; -- called also sestuor.
seta
One of the spinelike feathers at the base of the bill of certain birds.
sett
See Set, n., 2 (e) and 3.
setiferous
Producing, or having one or more, bristles.
setdown
The humbling of a person by act or words, especially by a retort or a reproof; the retort or the reproof which has such effect.
seten
Obs. imp. pl. of Sit. Sat.
setness
The quality or state of being set; formality; obstinacy.
setous
Thickly set with bristles or bristly hairs.
seven
One more than six; six and one added; as, seven days make one week.
setula
A small, short hair or bristle; a small seta.
setwall
A plant formerly valued for its restorative qualities (Valeriana officinalis, or V. Pyrenaica).
sevocation
A calling aside.
sewage
The contents of a sewer or drain; refuse liquids or matter carried off by sewers
sfumato
Having vague outlines, and colors and shades so mingled as to give a misty appearance; -- said of a painting.
sexradiate
Having six rays; -- said of certain sponge spicules. See Illust. of Spicule.
sexed
Belonging to sex; having sex; distinctively male of female; as, the sexed condition.
sewing
The act or occupation of one who sews.
sexagenary
Pertaining to, or designating, the number sixty; poceeding by sixties; sixty years old.
sexifid
Six-cleft; as, a sexfid calyx or nectary.
sexlocular
Having six cells for seeds; six-celled; as, a sexlocular pericarp.
seyh
Imp. sing. & 2d pers. pl. of See.
sext
The office for the sixth canonical hour, being a part of the Breviary.
sexualist
One who classifies plants by the sexual method of Linnaeus.
seyen
Imp. pl. & p. p. of See.
seynd
P. p. of Senge, to singe.
shah
The title of the supreme ruler in certain Eastern countries, especially Persia.
shadbird
The American, or Wilson's, snipe. See under Snipe. So called because it appears at the same time as the shad.
shab
The itch in animals; also, a scab.
shack
To shed or fall, as corn or grain at harvest.
shaffle
To hobble or limp; to shuffle.
shag
Coarse hair or nap; rough, woolly hair.
shale
A shell or husk; a cod or pod.
shail
To walk sidewise.
shake
Obs. p. p. of Shake.
shandrydan
A jocosely depreciative name for a vehicle.
sham
That which deceives expectation; any trick, fraud, or device that deludes and disappoint; a make-believe; delusion; imposture, humbug.
shapable
That may be shaped.
silk
Hence, thread spun, or cloth woven, from the above-named material.
shriek
To utter a loud, sharp, shrill sound or cry, as do some birds and beasts; to scream, as in a sudden fright, in horror or anguish.
shikari
A sportsman; esp., a native hunter.
sheld
Variegated; spotted; speckled; piebald.
shebander
A harbor master, or ruler of a port, in the East Indies.
shave
Obs. p. p. of Shave.
shash
The scarf of a turban.
shatter
To disorder; to derange; to render unsound; as, to be shattered in intellect; his constitution was shattered; his hopes were shattered.
shaw
A thicket; a small wood or grove.
sheading
A tithing, or division, in the Isle of Man, in which there is a coroner, or chief constable. The island is divided into six sheadings.
shilfa
The chaffinch; -- so named from its call note.
shecklaton
A kind of gilt leather. See Checklaton.
shed
To separate; to divide.
sheen
Bright; glittering; radiant; fair; showy; sheeny.
shekel
An ancient weight and coin used by the Jews and by other nations of the same stock.
sheth
The part of a plow which projects downward beneath the beam, for holding the share and other working parts; -- also called standard, or post.
sheol
The place of departed spirits; Hades; also, the grave.
shemite
A descendant of Shem.
shend
To injure, mar, spoil, or harm.
shepen
A stable; a shippen.
sherbet
A flavored water ice.
shide
A thin board; a billet of wood; a splinter.
shewer
One who shews. See Shower.
shibboleth
Also in an extended sense.
shie
See Shy, to throw.
shift
To divide; to distribute; to apportion.
shoe
A covering for the human foot, usually made of leather, having a thick and somewhat stiff sole and a lighter top.
shistose
See Shist, Schistose.
shin
The front part of the leg below the knee; the front edge of the shin bone; the lower part of the leg; the shank.
shill
To put under cover; to sheal.
shim
A kind of shallow plow used in tillage to break the ground, and clear it of weeds.
ship
Any large seagoing vessel.
shiraz
A kind of Persian wine; -- so called from the place whence it is brought.
shoading
The tracing of veins of metal by shoads.
shittle
Wavering; unsettled; inconstant.
shive
A slice; as, a shive of bread.
shock
A lot consisting of sixty pieces; -- a term applied in some Baltic ports to loose goods.
shoddy
A fibrous material obtained by "deviling," or tearing into fibers, refuse woolen goods, old stockings, rags, druggets, etc.
shoshones
A linguistic family or stock of North American Indians, comprising many tribes, which extends from Montana and Idaho into Mexico.
shoo
Begone; away; -- an expression used in frightening away animals, especially fowls.
shog
A shock; a jog; a violent concussion or impulse.
shonde
Harm; disgrace; shame.
shop
Imp. of Shape. Shaped.
shorage
Duty paid for goods brought on shore.
shove
To push along, aside, or away, in a careless or rude manner; to jostle.
shot
Imp. & p. p. of Shoot.
shoulder
Fig.: That which supports or sustains; support.
shrag
A twig of a tree cut off.
show
To exhibit to the mental view; to tell; to disclose; to reveal; to make known; as, to show one's designs.
shred
A long, narrow piece cut or torn off; a strip.
side
The right or left part of the wall or trunk of the body; as, a pain in the side.
siaga
The ahu, or jairou.
shug
To writhe the body so as to produce friction against one's clothes, as do those who have the itch.
shuck
A shock of grain.
shroff
A banker, or changer of money.
shrub
A liquor composed of vegetable acid, especially lemon juice, and sugar, with spirit to preserve it.
shudder
To tremble or shake with fear, horrer, or aversion; to shiver with cold; to quake.
shuffle
To shove one way and the other; to push from one to another; as, to shuffle money from hand to hand.
shyly
In a shy or timid manner; not familiarly; with reserve.
shun
To avoid; to keep clear of; to get out of the way of; to escape from; to eschew; as, to shun rocks, shoals, vice.
shut
To close so as to hinder ingress or egress; as, to shut a door or a gate; to shut one's eyes or mouth.
shyness
The quality or state of being shy.
shyster
A trickish knave; one who carries on any business, especially legal business, in a mean and dishonest way.
sicca
A seal; a coining die; -- used adjectively to designate the silver currency of the Mogul emperors, or the Indian rupee of 192 grains.
siberian
Of or pertaining to Siberia, a region comprising all northern Asia and belonging to Russia; as, a Siberian winter.
sialogogue
An agent which promotes the flow of saliva.
siamang
A gibbon (Hylobates syndactylus), native of Sumatra. It has the second and third toes partially united by a web.
sibilancy
The quality or state of being sibilant; sibilation.
sibyl
A woman supposed to be endowed with a spirit of prophecy.
sick
Affected with disease of any kind; ill; indisposed; not in health. See the Synonym under Illness.
sice
The number six at dice.
sicilian
Of or pertaining to Sicily or its inhabitants.
siker
Sure; certain; trusty.
sickish
Somewhat sick or diseased.
sift
To separate with a sieve, as the fine part of a substance from the coarse; as, to sift meal or flour; to sift powder; to sift sand or lime.
siesta
A short sleep taken about the middle of the day, or after dinner; a midday nap.
siege
A seat; especially, a royal seat; a throne.
siding
Attaching one's self to a party.
sidle
To go or move with one side foremost; to move sidewise; as, to sidle through a crowd or narrow opening.
sienna
Clay that is colored red or brown by the oxides of iron or manganese, and used as a pigment. It is used either in the raw state or burnt.
sierra
A ridge of mountain and craggy rocks, with a serrated or irregular outline; as, the Sierra Nevada.
sifac
The white indris of Madagascar. It is regarded by the natives as sacred.
sieur
Sir; -- a title of respect used by the French.
sieva
A small variety of the Lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus).
sifflement
The act of whistling or hissing; a whistling sound; sibilation.
sifilet
The six-shafted bird of paradise. See Paradise bird, under Paradise.
sign
That by which anything is made known or represented; that which furnishes evidence; a mark; a token; an indication; a proof.
sigil
A seal; a signature.
sigaultian
Pertaining to Sigault, a French physician. See Symphyseotomy.
sigh
Hence, to lament; to grieve.
sigla
The signs, abbreviations, letters, or characters standing for words, shorthand, etc., in ancient manuscripts, or on coins, medals, etc.
sigma
The Greek letter /, /, or / (English S, or s). It originally had the form of the English C.
silage
Short for Ensilage.
sike
A gutter; a stream, such as is usually dry in summer.
sikhs
A religious sect noted for warlike traits, founded in the Punjab at the end of the 15th century.
silhouette
A representation of the outlines of an object filled in with a black color; a profile portrait in black, such as a shadow appears to be.
sile
To strain, as fresh milk.
silicate
A salt of silicic acid.
sith
Since; afterwards; seeing that.
sink
To enter deeply; to fall or retire beneath or below the surface; to penetrate.
simmer
To boil gently, or with a gentle hissing; to begin to boil.
selvas
Vast woodland plains of South America.
silt
Mud or fine earth deposited from running or standing water.
sill
The timber or stone at the foot of a door; the threshold.
silo
A pit or vat for packing away green fodder for winter use so as to exclude air and outside moisture. See Ensilage.
silure
A fish of the genus Silurus, as the sheatfish; a siluroid.
silva
The forest trees of a region or country, considered collectively.
simblot
The harness of a drawloom.
silver
A soft white metallic element, sonorous, ductile, very malleable, and capable of a high degree of polish.
simar
A woman's long dress or robe; also light covering; a scarf.
simial
Simian; apelike.
semious
Of or pertaining to the Sim/; monkeylike.
since
From a definite past time until now; as, he went a month ago, and I have not seen him since.
simper
To smile in a silly, affected, or conceited manner.
simnel
A kind of cake made of fine flour; a cracknel.
simoniac
One who practices simony, or who buys or sells preferment in the church.
simulacrum
A likeness; a semblance; a mock appearance; a sham; -- now usually in a derogatory sense.
sinaitic
Of or pertaining to Mount Sinai; given or made at Mount Sinai; as, the Sinaitic law.
sinful
Tainted with, or full of, sin; wicked; iniquitous; criminal; unholy; as, sinful men; sinful thoughts.
sindon
A small rag or pledget introduced into the hole in the cranium made by a trephine.
sine
The length of a perpendicular drawn from one extremity of an arc of a circle to the diameter drawn through the other extremity.
sing
To utter sweet melodious sounds, as birds do.
sinical
Of or pertaining to a sine; employing, or founded upon, sines; as, a sinical quadrant.
sirkeer
Any one of several species of Asiatic cuckoos of the genus Taccocua, as the Bengal sirkeer (T. sirkee).
siphoid
A siphon bottle. See under Siphon, n.
sinter
Dross, as of iron; the scale which files from iron when hammered; -- applied as a name to various minerals.
sinner
To act as a sinner.
sinologue
A student of Chinese; one versed in the Chinese language, literature, and history.
siniate
Having the margin alternately curved inward and outward; having rounded lobes separated by rounded sinuses; sinuous; wavy.
sinuate
To bend or curve in and out; to wind; to turn; to be sinusous.
sirdar
A native chief in Hindostan; a headman.
sipid
Having a taste or flavorl savory; sapid.
sircar
A Hindoo clerk or accountant.
sire
A lord, master, or other person in authority. See Sir.
siriasis
The act of exposing to a sun bath. [Obs.] Cf. Insolation.
siskin
A small green and yellow European finch (Spinus spinus, or Carduelis spinus); -- called also aberdevine.
syrup
A thick and viscid liquid made from the juice of fruits, herbs, etc., boiled with sugar.
sirloin
A loin of beef, or a part of a loin.
sirocco
An oppressive, relaxing wind from the Libyan deserts, chiefly experienced in Italy, Malta, and Sicily.
siscowet
A large, fat variety of the namaycush found in Lake Superior; -- called also siskawet, siskiwit.
sise
Six; the highest number on a die; the cast of six in throwing dice.
sist
To stay, as judicial proceedings; to delay or suspend; to stop.
sismograph
See Seismograph.
siss
To make a hissing sound; as, a flatiron hot enough to siss when touched with a wet finger.
site
The place where anything is fixed; situation; local position; as, the site of a city or of a house.
sisyphean
Relating to Sisyphus; incessantly recurring; as, Sisyphean labors.
sitfast
Fixed; stationary; immovable.
skeg
A sort of wild plum.
sizy
Sizelike; viscous; glutinous; as, sizy blood.
sixpence
An English silver coin of the value of six pennies; half a shilling, or about twelve cents.
situated
Placed; residing.
sitology
A treatise on the regulation of the diet; dietetics.
sitten
P. p. of Sit, for sat.
siva
One of the triad of Hindoo gods. He is the avenger or destroyer, and in modern worship symbolizes the reproductive power of nature.
sixfold
Six times repeated; six times as much or as many.
sizable
Of considerable size or bulk.
sixscore
Six times twenty; one hundred and twenty.
sixteen
Six and ten; consisting of six and ten; fifteen and one more.
size
A thin, weak glue used in various trades, as in painting, bookbinding, paper making, etc.
siziness
The quality or state of being sizy; viscousness.
skare
Wild; timid; shy.
skag
An additional piece fastened to the keel of a boat to prevent lateral motion. See Skeg.
sizzle
To make a hissing sound; to fry, or to dry and shrivel up, with a hissing sound.
skaddon
The larva of a bee.
skainsmate
A messmate; a companion.
skall
To scale; to mount.
skean
A knife or short dagger, esp. that in use among the Highlanders of Scotland. [Variously spelt.]
skate
A metallic runner with a frame shaped to fit the sole of a shoe, -- made to be fastened under the foot, and used for moving rapidly on ice.
skayles
[159.] Skittles.
skedaddle
To betake one's self to flight, as if in a panic; to flee; to run away.
skee
A long strip of wood, curved upwards in front, used on the foot for sliding.
skilder
To beg; to pilfer; to skelder.
skerry
A rocky isle; an insulated rock.
skieldrake
The common European sheldrake.
skein
A quantity of yarn, thread, or the like, put up together, after it is taken from the reel, -- usually tied in a sort of knot.
skelder
To deceive; to cheat; to trick.
skelet
A skeleton. See Scelet.
skep
A coarse round farm basket.
skid
A piece of timber used as a support, or to receive pressure.
sketch
To draw the outline or chief features of; to make a rought of.
skew
Awry; obliquely; askew.
skied
Imp. & p. p. of Sky, v. t.
skiff
A small, light boat.
skive
The iron lap used by diamond polishers in finishing the facets of the gem.
skip
A basket. See Skep.
skim
To take off by skimming; as, to skim cream.
skin
The external membranous integument of an animal.
skirl
To utter in a shrill tone; to scream.
skit
To cast reflections on; to asperse.
skrike
The missel thrush.
sklere
To shelter; to cover.
skowitz
The silver salmon.
skulk
To hide, or get out of the way, in a sneaking manner; to lie close, or to move in a furtive way; to lurk.
skua
Any jager gull; especially, the Megalestris skua; -- called also boatswain.
skunk
In games of chance and skill: To defeat (an opponent) (as in cards) so that he fails to gain a point, or (in checkers) to get a king.
stop
To close, as an aperture, by filling or by obstructing; as, to stop the ears; hence, to stanch, as a wound.
sonnet
A short poem, -- usually amatory.
smyrniot
Of or pertaining to Smyrna.
slouch
An awkward, heavy, clownish fellow.
sleid
To sley, or prepare for use in the weaver's sley, or slaie.
slam
To shut with force and a loud noise; to bang; as, he slammed the door.
slab
A thin piece of anything, especially of marble or other stone, having plane surfaces.
skylarking
The act of running about the rigging of a vessel in sport; hence, frolicking; scuffing; sporting; carousing.
skyed
Surrounded by sky.
skyish
Like the sky, or approaching the sky; lofty; ethereal.
skyrocket
A rocket that ascends high and burns as it flies; a species of fireworks.
skysail
The sail set next above the royal. See Illust. under Sail.
slag
The dross, or recrement, of a metal; also, vitrified cinders.
slack
Small coal; also, coal dust; culm.
slade
A little dell or valley; a flat piece of low, moist ground.
slaie
A weaver's reed; a sley.
slake
To allay; to quench; to extinguish; as, to slake thirst.
slave
A drudge; one who labors like a slave.
slash
To cut by striking violently and at random; to cut in long slits.
slander
Disgrace; reproach; dishonor; opprobrium.
slap
A blow, esp. one given with the open hand, or with something broad.
slat
A thin, narrow strip or bar of wood or metal; as, the slats of a window blind.
slaughter
The act of killing.
sleave
The knotted or entangled part of silk or thread.
slaw
Sliced cabbage served as a salad, cooked or uncooked.
slay
To put to death with a weapon, or by violence; hence, to kill; to put an end to; to destroy.
sled
A vehicle on runners, used for conveying loads over the snow or ice; -- in England called sledge.
sleek
Having an even, smooth surface; smooth; hence, glossy; as, sleek hair.
slish
A cut; as, slish and slash.
slice
A thin, broad piece cut off; as, a slice of bacon; a slice of cheese; a slice of bread.
sleuth
The track of man or beast as followed by the scent.
slender
Small or narrow in proportion to the length or the height; not thick; slim; as, a slender stem or stalk of a plant.
slep
Imp. of Sleep. Slept.
slewth
Sloth; idleness.
sley
A weaver's reed.
slim
Weak; slight; unsubstantial; poor; as, a slim argument.
slid
Imp. & p. p. of Slide.
slight
To overthrow; to demolish.
sling
The act or motion of hurling as with a sling; a throw; figuratively, a stroke.
slip
To move along the surface of a thing without bounding, rolling, or stepping; to slide; to glide.
sloe
A small, bitter, wild European plum, the fruit of the blackthorn (Prunus spinosa); also, the tree itself.
sloakan
A species of seaweed. [Spelled also slowcawn.] See 3d Laver.
slit
3d. pers. sing. pres. of Slide.
slive
To cut; to split; to separate.
slobberer
One who slobbers.
slocken
To quench; to allay; to slake. See Slake.
slop
Water or other liquid carelessly spilled or thrown aboyt, as upon a table or a floor; a puddle; a soiled spot.
slogan
The war cry, or gathering word, of a Highland clan in Scotland; hence, any rallying cry.
sloop
A vessel having one mast and fore-and-aft rig, consisting of a boom-and-gaff mainsail, jibs, staysail, and gaff topsail.
sloshy
See Slush, Slushy.
slot
A broad, flat, wooden bar; a slat or sloat.
smear
To overspread with anything unctuous, viscous, or adhesive; to daub; as, to smear anything with oil.
slur
To soil; to sully; to contaminate; to disgrace.
sludge
Mud; mire; soft mud; slush.
slovenly
A slovenly manner.
sloven
A man or boy habitually negligent of neathess and order; -- the correlative term to slattern, or slut.
slowenly
Having the habits of a sloven; negligent of neatness and order, especially in dress.
slow
Imp. of Slee, to slay. Slew.
slub
A roll of wool slightly twisted; a rove; -- called also slubbing.
sluice
Hence, an opening or channel through which anything flows; a source of supply.
slue
To turn about a fixed point, usually the center or axis, as a spar or piece of timber; to turn; -- used also of any heavy body.
slug
A drone; a slow, lazy fellow; a sluggard.
slumber
To sleep; especially, to sleep lightly; to doze.
slung
Imp. & p. p. of Sling.
slype
A narrow passage between two buildings, as between the transept and chapter house of a monastery.
slyboots
A humerous appellation for a sly, cunning, or waggish person.
slush
A mixture of snow and water; half-melted snow.
slut
An untidy woman; a slattern.
slyly
In a sly manner; shrewdly; craftily.
slyness
The quality or state of being sly.
smaragdine
Of or pertaining to emerald; resembling emerald; of an emerald green.
smack
A small sailing vessel, commonly rigged as a sloop, used chiefly in the coasting and fishing trade.
small
Being of slight consequence; feeble in influence or importance; unimportant; trivial; insignificant; as, a small fault; a small business.
smash
To break in pieces by violence; to dash to pieces; to crush.
smatch
Taste; tincture; smack.
smirch
To smear with something which stains, or makes dirty; to smutch; to begrime; to soil; to sully.
smerky
Smart; jaunty; spruce. See Smirk, a.
smegma
The matter secreted by any of the sebaceous glands.
smectite
A hydrous silicate of alumina, of a greenish color, which, in certain states of humidity, appears transparent and almost gelatinous.
smee
The pintail duck.
smeir
A salt glaze on pottery, made by adding common salt to an earthenware glaze.
smell
To detect or perceive, as if by the sense of smell; to scent out; -- often with out.
smift
A match for firing a charge of powder, as in blasting; a fuse.
smew
Small European merganser (Mergus albellus) which has a white crest; -- called also smee, smee duck, white merganser, and white nun.
smicker
To look amorously or wantonly; to smirk.
smilax
A delicate trailing plant (Myrsiphyllum asparagoides) much used for decoration. It is a native of the Cape of Good Hope.
sminthurid
Any one of numerous small species of springtails, of the family Sminthuridae, -- usually found on flowers.
smoor
To suffocate or smother.
smokable
Capable of being smoked; suitable or ready to be smoked; as, smokable tobacco.
smit
Imp. & p. p. of Smite.
smock
A woman's under-garment; a shift; a chemise.
smoulder
To burn and smoke without flame; to waste away by a slow and supressed combustion.
smolt
A young salmon two or three years old, when it has acquired its silvery color.
smouch
To kiss closely.
smore
To smother. See Smoor.
smote
Imp. (/ rare p. p.) of Smite.
smug
Studiously neat or nice, especially in dress; spruce; affectedly precise; smooth and prim.
smudge
A suffocating smoke.
smut
Foul matter, like soot or coal dust; also, a spot or soil made by such matter.
sSociable
Capable of being, or fit to be, united in one body or company; associable.
snite
To blow, as the nose; to snuff, as a candle.
sneck
To fasten by a hatch; to latch, as a door.
snap
To break at once; to break short, as substances that are brittle.
snag
A stump or base of a branch that has been lopped off; a short branch, or a sharp or rough branch; a knot; a protuberance.
snack
A share; a part or portion; -- obsolete, except in the colloquial phrase, to go snacks, i. e., to share.
snaffle
To put a snaffle in the mouth of; to subject to the snaffle; to bridle.
snail
Any one of numerous species of terrestrial air-breathing gastropods belonging to the genus Helix and many allied genera of the family Helicidae.
snake
Any species of the order Ophidia; an ophidian; a serpent, whether harmless or venomous. See Ophidia, and Serpent.
snatch
To take or seize hastily, abruptly, or without permission or ceremony; as, to snatch a loaf or a kiss.
snare
A contrivance, often consisting of a noose of cord, or the like, by which a bird or other animal may be entangled and caught; a trap; a gin.
snast
The snuff, or burnt wick, of a candle.
snead
A line or cord; a string.
sneb
To reprimand; to sneap.
snib
To check; to sneap; to sneb.
snell
Active; brisk; nimble; quick; sharp.
sned
To lop; to snathe.
sneer
To show contempt by turning up the nose, or by a particular facial expression.
snet
The fat of a deer.
snew
To snow; to abound.
sniff
To draw air audibly up the nose; to snuff; -- sometimes done as a gesture of suspicion, offense, or contempt.
snick
A small cut or mark.
snide
Tricky; deceptive; contemptible; as, a snide lawyer; snide goods.
snig
To chop off; to cut.
snip
To cut off the nip or neb of, or to cut off at once with shears or scissors; to clip off suddenly; to nip; hence, to break off; to snatch away.
snuff
The part of a candle wick charred by the flame, whether burning or not.
snore
To breathe with a rough, hoarse, nasal voice in sleep.
snod
A fillet; a headband; a snood.
snivel
To run at the nose; to make a snuffling noise.
snob
A vulgar person who affects to be better, richer, or more fashionable, than he really is; a vulgar upstart; one who apes his superiors.
snoff
A short candle end used for igniting a fuse.
snood
The fillet which binds the hair of a young unmarried woman, and is emblematic of her maiden character.
snow
A square-rigged vessel, differing from a brig only in that she has a trysail mast close abaft the mainmast, on which a large trysail is hoisted.
snot
Mucus secreted in, or discharged from, the nose.
snout
The long, projecting nose of a beast, as of swine.
snub
To sob with convulsions.
snudge
To lie snug or quiet.
soap
To rub or wash over with soap.
soak
To drench; to wet thoroughly.
snug
Close and warm; as, an infant lies snug.
snying
A curved plank, placed edgewise, to work in the bows of a vessel.
soal
The sole of a shoe.
soam
A chain by which a leading horse draws a plow.
sober
Temperate in the use of spirituous liquors; habitually temperate; as, a sober man.
soar
To fly aloft, as a bird; to mount upward on wings, or as on wings.
sobbing
A series of short, convulsive inspirations, the glottis being suddenly closed so that little or no air enters into the lungs.
sobriety
Habitual soberness or temperance as to the use of spirituous liquors; as, a man of sobriety.
soboles
A shoot running along under ground, forming new plants at short distances.
socager
A tennant by socage; a socman.
solfatara
A volcanic area or vent which yields only sulphur vapors, steam, and the like. It represents the stages of the volcanic activity.
soffit
The under side of the subordinate parts and members of buildings, such as staircases, entablatures, archways, cornices, or the like.
socratical
Of or pertaining to Socrates, the Grecian sage and teacher. (b. c. 469-399), or to his manner of teaching and philosophizing.
socle
A plain block or plinth forming a low pedestal; any base; especially, the base of a statue, column, or the like.
sociable
A gathering of people for social purposes; an informal party or reception; as, a church sociable.
sock
A knit or woven covering for the foot and lower leg; a stocking with a short leg.
socman
One who holds lands or tenements by socage; a socager.
socome
A custom of tenants to grind corn at the lord's mill.
sodic
Of or pertaining to sodium; containing sodium.
soda
Sodium oxide or hydroxide.
sodden
Boiled; seethed; also, soaked; heavy with moisture; saturated; as, sodden beef; sodden bread; sodden fields.
sodomite
An inhabitant of Sodom.
sofa
A long seat, usually with a cushioned bottom, back, and ends; -- much used as a comfortable piece of furniture.
soja
An Asiatic leguminous herb (Glycine Soja) the seeds of which are used in preparing the sauce called soy.
soho
Ho; -- a word used in calling from a distant place; a sportsman's halloo.
soft
Not rough, rugged, or harsh to the touch; smooth; delicate; fine; as, soft silk; a soft skin.
sogginess
The quality or state of being soggy; soddenness; wetness.
soil
Dung; faeces; compost; manure; as, night soil.
soiree
An evening party; -- distinguished from levee, and matinee.
soko
An African anthropoid ape, supposed to be a variety of the chimpanzee.
sojourn
A temporary residence, as that of a traveler in a foreign land.
soke
One of the small territorial divisions into which Lincolnshire, England, is divided.
sold
Imp. & p. p. of Sell.
sole
The bottom of the foot; hence, also, rarely, the foot itself.
somal
A Hamitic people of East Central Africa.
solubility
The quality, condition, or degree of being soluble or solvable; as, the solubility of a salt; the solubility of a problem or intricate difficulty.
solo
A tune, air, strain, or a whole piece, played by a single person on an instrument, or sung by a single voice.
solicit
To ask from with earnestness; to make petition to; to apply to for obtaining something; as, to solicit person for alms.
sollar
A platform in a shaft, especially one of those between the series of ladders in a shaft.
solpugid
Of or pertaining to the Solifugae.
solstice
A stopping or standing still of the sun.
solvable
Susceptible of being solved, resolved, or explained; admitting of solution.
sola
Alone; -- chiefly used in stage directions, and the like.
solute
Loose; free; liberal; as, a solute interpretation.
soma
The whole axial portion of an animal, including the head, neck, trunk, and tail.
samaj
A society; a congregation; a worshiping assembly, or church, esp. of the Brahmo-somaj.
sompne
To summon; to cite.
somite
One of the actual or ideal serial segments of which an animal, esp. an articulate or vertebrate, is is composed; somatome; metamere.
sombre
Dull; dusky; somewhat dark; gloomy; as, a somber forest; a somber house.
some
Not much; a little; moderate; as, the censure was to some extent just.
somner
A summoner; esp., one who summons to an ecclesiastical court.
somonce
A summons; a citation.
sonde
That which is sent; a message or messenger; hence, also, a visitation of providence; an affliction or trial.
sonance
A sound; a tune; as, to sound the tucket sonance.
sonsy
Lucky; fortunate; thriving; plump.
sonifer
A kind of ear trumpet for the deaf, or the partially deaf.
song
That which is sung or uttered with musical modulations of the voice, whether of a human being or of a bird, insect, etc.
sonless
Being without a son.
splotch
A spot; a stain; a daub.
soyned
Filled with care; anxious.
sort
Chance; lot; destiny.
sopra
Above; before; over; upon.
soosoo
A kind of dolphin (Platanista Gangeticus) native of the river Ganges; the Gangetic dolphin. It has a long, slender, somewhat spatulate beak.
sontag
A knitted worsted jacket, worn over the waist of a woman's dress.
sonometer
An instrument for exhibiting the transverse vibrations of cords, and ascertaining the relations between musical notes.
sonship
The state of being a son, or of bearing the relation of a son; filiation.
soon
In a short time; shortly after any time specified or supposed; as, soon after sunrise.
soorma
A preparation of antimony with which Mohammedan men anoint their eyelids.
sopite
To lay asleep; to put to sleep; to quiet.
soot
To cover or dress with soot; to smut with, or as with, soot; as, to soot land.
soph
A contraction of Soph ister.
sopor
Profound sleep from which a person can be roused only with difficulty.
soppy
Soaked or saturated with liquid or moisture; very wet or sloppy.
sorgne
The three-beared rocking, or whistlefish.
sorcerer
A conjurer; an enchanter; a magician.
sopsavine
See Sops of wine, under Sop.
sorb
The wild service tree (Pyrus torminalis) of Europe; also, the rowan tree.
sordid
Filthy; foul; dirty.
sore
Reddish brown; sorrel.
sororal
Relating to a sister; sisterly.
soricine
Of or pertaining to the Shrew family (Soricidae); like a shrew in form or habits; as, the soricine bat (Glossophaga soricina).
sorn
To obtrude one's self on another for bed and board.
sorrage
The blades of green or barley.
sors
A lot; also, a kind of divination by means of lots.
sound
The air bladder of a fish; as, cod sounds are an esteemed article of food.
sotted
A. & p. p. of Sot. Befooled; deluded; besotted.
soss
To fall at once into a chair or seat; to sit lazily.
sorus
One of the fruit dots, or small clusters of sporangia, on the back of the fronds of ferns.
sory
Green vitriol, or some earth imregnated with it.
sotadic
Pertaining to, or resembling, the lascivious compositions of the Greek poet Sotades.
sothic
Of or pertaining to Sothis, the Egyptian name for the Dog Star; taking its name from the Dog Star; canicular.
souffle
A murmuring or blowing sound; as, the uterine souffle heard over the pregnant uterus.
souchong
A kind of black tea of a fine quality.
soudet
United; consolidated; made firm; strengthened.
sough
A small drain; an adit.
soul
To afford suitable sustenance.
sovereign
Supreme or highest in power; superior to all others; chief; as, our sovereign prince.
souse
A corrupt form of Sou.
soup
To sup or swallow.
sour
Having an acid or sharp, biting taste, like vinegar, and the juices of most unripe fruits; acid; tart.
soutache
A kind of narrow braid, usually of silk; -- also known as Russian braid.
souvenir
That which serves as a reminder; a remembrancer; a memento; a keepsake.
sowbane
The red goosefoot (Chenopodium rubrum), -- said to be fatal to swine.
sovran
A variant of Sovereign.
sowar
In India, a mounted soldier.
sowle
To pull by the ears; to drag about.
sower
One who, or that which, sows.
soyle
To solve, to clear up; as, to soyl all other texts.
spekboom
The purslane tree of South Africa, -- said to be the favorite food of elephants.
spasm
An involuntary and unnatural contraction of one or more muscles or muscular fibers.
spaghetti
A variety or macaroni made in tubes of small diameter.
space
Extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible.
sozzle
To splash or wet carelessly; as, to sozzle the feet in water.
spaad
A kind of spar; earth flax, or amianthus.
spadassin
A bravo; a bully; a duelist.
spae
To foretell; to divine.
spale
A lath; a shaving or chip, as of wood or stone.
spahee
Formerly, one of the Turkish cavalry.
spakenet
A net for catching crabs.
span
Imp. & p. p. of Spin.
spar
An old name for a nonmetallic mineral, usually cleavable and somewhat lustrous; as, calc spar, or calcite, fluor spar, etc.
speking
The act of uttering words.
spawl
A splinter or fragment, as of wood or stone. See Spall.
spat
A young oyster or other bivalve mollusk, both before and after it first becomes adherent, or such young, collectively.
spavin
A disease of horses characterized by a bony swelling developed on the hock as the result of inflammation of the bones; also, the swelling itself.
spay
To remove or extirpate the ovaries of, as a sow or a bitch; to castrate (a female animal).
speak
To express opinions; to say; to talk; to converse.
sped
Imp. & p. p. of Speed.
spear
A long, pointed weapon, used in war and hunting, by thrusting or throwing; a weapon with a long shaft and a sharp head or blade; a lance.
special
Of or pertaining to a species; constituting a species or sort.
speech
The faculty of uttering articulate sounds or words; the faculty of expressing thoughts by words or articulate sounds; the power of speaking.
speight
A woodpecker; -- called also specht, spekt, spight.
spica
A star of the first magnitude situated in the constellation Virgo.
spacelate
To die, decay, or become gangrenous, as flesh or bone; to mortify.
sperre
To shut in; to support; to inclose; to fasten.
spelding
A haddock or other small fish split open and dried in the sun; -- called also speldron.
spence
A place where provisions are kept; a buttery; a larder; a pantry.
spet
To spit; to throw out.
spew
To eject from the stomach; to vomit.
sphincter
A muscle which surrounds, and by its contraction tends to close, a natural opening; as, the sphincter of the bladder.
sphacelate
To affect with gangrene.
sphene
A mineral found usually in thin, wedge-shaped crystals of a yellow or green to black color. It is a silicate of titanium and calcium; titanite.
sphrigosis
A condition of vegetation in which there is too abundant growth of the stem and leaves, accompanied by deficiency of flowers and fruit.
sphygmic
Of or pertaining to the pulse.
spin
To protract; to spend by delays; as, to spin out the day in idleness.
spight
A woodpecker. See Speight.
spider
Any one of numerous species of arachnids comprising the order Araneina. Spiders have the mandibles converted into poison fangs, or falcers.
spied
Imp. & p. p. of Spy.
spike
A sort of very large nail; also, a piece of pointed iron set with points upward or outward.
spile
A small plug or wooden pin, used to stop a vent, as in a cask.
spit
A long, slender, pointed rod, usually of iron, for holding meat while roasting.
spirable
Capable of being breathed; respirable.
spiss
Thick; crowded; compact; dense.
spleen
A peculiar glandlike but ductless organ found near the stomach or intestine of most vertebrates and connected with the vascular system; the milt.
splanchnic
Of or pertaining to the viscera; visceral.
splice
To unite in marrige.
stance
A station; a position; a site.
spume
Frothy matter raised on liquids by boiling, effervescence, or agitation; froth; foam; scum.
spot
A mark on a substance or body made by foreign matter; a blot; a place discolored.
spoliate
To plunder; to pillage; to despoil; to rob.
spoffish
Earnest and active in matters of no moment; bustling.
splurge
A blustering demonstration, or great effort; a great display.
spodomancy
Divination by means of ashes.
spoil
To plunder; to strip by violence; to pillage; to rob; -- with of before the name of the thing taken; as, to spoil one of his goods or possession.
spoke
The radius or ray of a wheel; one of the small bars which are inserted in the hub, or nave, and which serve to support the rim or felly.
spontoon
A kind of half-pike, or halberd, formerly borne by inferior officers of the British infantry, and used in giving signals to the soldiers.
spondaical
Or of pertaining to a spondee; consisting of spondees.
spnsorial
Pertaining to a sponsor.
spook
A spirit; a ghost; an apparition; a hobgoblin.
sporades
Stars not included in any constellation; -- called also informed, or unformed, stars.
sprig
A small shoot or twig of a tree or other plant; a spray; as, a sprig of laurel or of parsley.
srawls
Small branches of a tree; twigs; sprays.
spousal
Of or pertaining to a spouse or marriage; nuptial; matrimonial; conjugal; bridal; as, spousal rites; spousal ornaments.
sprack
Quick; lively; alert.
spray
A small shoot or branch; a twig.
spread
To extend so as to cover something; to extend to a great or grater extent in every direction; to cause to fill or cover a wide or wider space.
spry
Having great power of leaping or running; nimble; active.
sprod
A salmon in its second year.
spruce
Any coniferous tree of the genus Picea, as the Norway spruce (P. excelsa), and the white and black spruces of America (P.
spud
Anything short and thick; specifically, a piece of dough boiled in fat.
spuller
One employed to inspect yarn, to see that it is well spun, and fit for the loom.
squib
A kind of slow match or safety fuse.
spyboat
A boat sent to make discoveries and bring intelligence.
sourt
Fig.: A sudden outbreak; as, a spurt of jealousy.
spun
Imp. & p. p. of Spin.
spur
An implement secured to the heel, or above the heel, of a horseman, to urge the horse by its pressure.
spurt
A sudden and energetic effort, as in an emergency; an increased exertion for a brief space.
sput
An annular reenforce, to strengthen a place where a hole is made.
spyne
See Pinnace, n., 1 (a).
spyglass
A small telescope for viewing distant terrestrial objects.
spyism
Act or business of spying.
squab
Fat; thick; plump; bulky.
squeak
To break silence or secrecy for fear of pain or punishment; to speak; to confess.
staff
A stick carried in the hand for support or defense by a person walking; hence, a support; that which props or upholds.
stab
Fig.: To injure secretly or by malicious falsehood or slander; as, to stab a person's reputation.
souir
To throw with a jerk; to throw edge foremost.
squirarch
One who belongs to the squirarchy.
staccato
Disconnected; separated; distinct; -- a direction to perform the notes of a passage in a short, distinct, and pointed manner.
staddle
Anything which serves for support; a staff; a prop; a crutch; a cane.
stail
Imp. & p. p. of Stay.
stag
The adult male of the red deer (Cervus elaphus), a large European species closely related to the American elk, or wapiti.
stahlian
Pertaining to, or taught by, Stahl, a German physician and chemist of the 17th century; as, the Stahlian theory of phlogiston.
stalactite
In an extended sense, any mineral or rock of similar form and origin; as, a stalactite of lava.
stake
A stick inserted upright in a lop, eye, or mortise, at the side or end of a cart, a flat car, or the like, to prevent goods from falling off.
stamen
A thread; especially, a warp thread.
stet
Let it stand; -- a word used by proof readers to signify that something once erased, or marked for omission, is to remain.
steik
To pierce with a sharp instrument; hence, to stitch; to sew; also, to fix; to fasten.
stave
One of the cylindrical bars of a lantern wheel; one of the bars or rounds of a rack, a ladder, etc.
stasimon
In the Greek tragedy, a song of the chorus, continued without the interruption of dialogue or anapaestics.
stapedial
Of or pertaining to stapes.
star
One of the innumerable luminous bodies seen in the heavens; any heavenly body other than the sun, moon, comets, and nebulae.
statable
That can be stated; as, a statablegrievance; the question at issue is statable.
staurolite
A mineral of a brown to black color occurring in prismatic crystals, often twinned so as to form groups resembling a cross.
stead
Place, or spot, in general.
staw
To be fixed or set; to stay.
stay
A large, strong rope, employed to support a mast, by being extended from the head of one mast down to some other, or to some part of the vessel.
stedfastly
See Stead, Steadfast, etc.
steed
A horse, especially a spirited horse for state of war; -- used chiefly in poetry or stately prose.
stela
A small column or pillar, used as a monument, milestone, etc.
steep
Bright; glittering; fiery.
steel
An instrument or implement made of steel
steinkirk
A kind of neckcloth worn in a loose and disorderly fashion.
steganopod
One of the Steganopodes.
steinbock
The European ibex.
stench
A smell; an odor.
steem
A gleam of light; flame.
stem
The principal body of a tree, shrub, or plant, of any kind; the main stock; the part which supports the branches or the head or top.
step
To walk; to go on foot; esp., to walk a little distance; as, to step to one of the neighbors.
stercorary
A place, properly secured from the weather, for containing dung.
stipe
The stalk or petiole of a frond, as of a fern.
stiddy
An anvil; also, a smith shop. See Stithy.
stiacciato
The lowest relief, -- often used in Italian sculpture of the 15th and 16th centuries.
steve
To pack or stow, as cargo in a ship's hold. See Steeve.
stew
A small pond or pool where fish are kept for the table; a vivarium.
stibial
Like, or having the qualities of, antimony; antimonial.
sticcado
An instrument consisting of small bars of wood, flat at the bottom and rounded at the top, and resting on the edges of a kind of open box.
stilar
Of or pertaining to the style of a dial.
stiff
Not easily bent; not flexible or pliant; not limber or flaccid; rigid; firm; as, stiff wood, paper, joints.
stigma
A mark made with a burning iron; a brand.
stime
A slight gleam or glimmer; a glimpse.
sting
Anything that gives acute pain, bodily or mental; as, the stings of remorse; the stings of reproach.
stoic
Hence, a person not easily excited; an apathetic person; one who is apparently or professedly indifferent to pleasure or pain.
stive
To stuff; to crowd; to fill full; hence, to make hot and close; to render stifling.
stir
To change the place of in any manner; to move.
stitch
A single pass of a needle in sewing; the loop or turn of the thread thus made.
stoak
To stop; to choke.
stocah
A menial attendant.
stoma
One of the minute apertures between the cells in many serous membranes.
stoke
To stick; to thrust; to stab.
stola
A long garment, descending to the ankles, worn by Roman women.
stood
Imp. & p. p. of Stand.
stond
Stop; halt; hindrance.
stor
Strong; powerful; hardy; bold; audacious.
synizesis
An obliteration of the pupil of the eye.
sunn
An East Indian leguminous plant (Crotalaria juncea) and its fiber, which is also called sunn hemp.
subreader
An under reader in the inns of court, who reads the texts of law the reader is to discourse upon.
stye
See Sty, a boil.
stub
A log; a block; a blockhead.
strabotomy
The operation for the removal of squinting by the division of such muscles as distort the eyeball.
stound
To be in pain or sorrow.
storage
The act of depositing in a store or warehouse for safe keeping; also, the safe keeping of goods in a warehouse.
stot
A young bull or ox, especially one three years old.
stove
To keep warm, in a house or room, by artificial heat; as, to stove orange trees.
stow
To put away in some place; to hide; to lodge.
stroam
To wander about idly and vacantly.
streak
To stretch; to extend; hence, to lay out, as a dead body.
stria
A fillet between the flutes of columns, pilasters, or the like.
struck
Imp. & p. p. of Strike.
strychnic
Of or pertaining to strychnine; produced by strychnine; as, strychnic compounds; strychnic poisoning
stun
To make senseless or dizzy by violence; to render senseless by a blow, as on the head.
stufa
A jet of steam issuing from a fissure in the earth.
stucco
Work made of stucco; stuccowork.
stud
A collection of breeding horses and mares, or the place where they are kept; also, a number of horses kept for a racing, riding, etc.
stull
A framework of timber covered with boards to support rubbish; also, a framework of boards to protect miners from falling stones.
stum
Unfermented grape juice or wine, often used to raise fermentation in dead or vapid wines; must.
stutter
To hesitate or stumble in uttering words; to speak with spasmodic repetition or pauses; to stammer.
stupa
A mound or monument commemorative of Buddha.
sturdily
In a sturdy manner.
styan
See Sty, a boil.
styca
An anglo-Saxon copper coin of the lowest value, being worth half a farthing.
subcaliber
Smaller than the caliber of a firearm.
suability
Liability to be sued; the state of being subjected by law to civil process.
styphnate
A salt of styphnic acid.
stygian
Of or pertaining to the river Styx; hence, hellish; infernal. See Styx.
stylaster
Any one of numerous species of delicate, usually pink, calcareous hydroid corals of the genus Stylaster.
styracin
A white crystalline tasteless substance extracted from gum storax, and consisting of a salt of cinnamic acid with cinnamic alcohol.
styx
The principal river of the lower world, which had to be crossed in passing to the regions of the dead.
suave
Sweet; pleasant; delightful; gracious or agreeable in manner; bland.
suant
Spread equally over the surface; uniform; even.
suasible
Capable of being persuaded; easily persuaded.
subacid
Moderately acid or sour; as, some plants have subacid juices.
subbeadle
An under beadle.
subimago
A stage in the development of certain insects, such as the May flies, intermediate between the pupa and imago.
subfamily
One of the subdivisions, of more importance than genus, into which certain families are divided.
subdean
An under dean; the deputy or substitute of a dean.
subeditor
An assistant editor, as of a periodical or journal.
subgeneric
Of or pertaining to a subgenus.
subhepatic
Situated under, or on the ventral side of, the liver; -- applied to the interlobular branches of the portal vein.
submammary
Situated under the mammae; as, submammary inflammation.
subjacent
Lying under or below.
sublate
To take or carry away; to remove.
subobtuse
Partially obtuse.
subnasal
Situated under the nose; as, the subnasal point, or the middle point of the inferior border of the anterior nasal aperture.
subpleural
Situated under the pleural membrane.
suggest
To introduce indirectly to the thoughts; to cause to be thought of, usually by the agency of other objects.
sudamina
Minute vesicles surrounded by an area of reddened skin, produced by excessive sweating.
subzonal
Situated under a zone, or zona; -- applied to a membrane between the zona radiata and the umbilical vesicle in the mammal embryo.
subulated
Very narrow, and tapering gradually to a fine point from a broadish base; awl-shaped; linear.
subsacral
Situated under, or on the ventral side of, the sacrum.
subtangent
The part of the axis contained between the ordinate and tangent drawn to the same point in a curve.
subvaginal
Situated under or inside a sheath or vaginal membrane; as, the subvaginal, or subdural, spaces about the optic nerve.
subway
An underground way or gallery; especially, a passage under a street, in which water mains, gas mains, telegraph wires, etc.
suck
To draw liquid from by the action of the mouth; as, to suck an orange; specifically, to draw milk from (the mother, the breast, etc.
succade
Sweetmeats, or preserves in sugar, whether fruit, vegetables, or confections.
such
Having the particular quality or character specified.
sucrate
A compound of sucrose (or of some related carbohydrate) with some base, after the analogy of a salt; as, sodium sucrate.
suction
The act or process of sucking; the act of drawing, as fluids, by exhausting the air.
suer
One who sues; a suitor.
sudra
The lowest of the four great castes among the Hindoos. See Caste.
sudden
Happening without previous notice or with very brief notice; coming unexpectedly, or without the common preparation; immediate; instant; speedy.
sudoral
Of or pertaining to sweat; as, sudoral eruptions.
suds
Water impregnated with soap, esp. when worked up into bubbles and froth.
suent
Uniformly or evenly distributed or spread; even; smooth. See Suant.
sufi
A title or surname of the king of Persia.
suety
Consisting of, or resembling, suet; as, a suety substance.
suffer
To feel, or endure, with pain, annoyance, etc.; to submit to with distress or grief; to undergo; as, to suffer pain of body, or grief of mind.
sugar
Compliment or flattery used to disguise or render acceptable something obnoxious; honeyed or soothing words.
sugescent
Of or pertaining to sucking.
sulphamate
A salt of sulphamic acid.
suit
The act of following or pursuing, as game; pursuit.
suine
A mixture of oleomargarine with lard or other fatty ingredients. It is used as a substitute for butter.
suicidal
Partaking of, or of the nature of, the crime or suicide.
suillage
A drain or collection of filth.
suigothus
The Scandinavian Goths. See the Note under Goths.
suist
One who seeks for things which gratify merely himself; a selfish person; a selfist.
sulcated
Scored with deep and regular furrows; furrowed or grooved; as, a sulcated stem.
suji
Indian wheat, granulated but not pulverized; a kind of semolina.
sula
A genus of sea birds including the booby and the common gannet.
sulk
To be silently sullen; to be morose or obstinate.
sullage
Drainage of filth; filth collected from the street or highway; sewage.
sump
A round pit of stone, lined with clay, for receiving the metal on its first fusion.
sumbul
The musky root of an Asiatic umbelliferous plant, Ferula Sumbul. It is used in medicine as a stimulant.
sultan
A ruler, or sovereign, of a Mohammedan state; specifically, the ruler of the Turks; the Padishah, or Grand Seignior; -- officially so called.
sumach
Any plant of the genus Rhus, shrubs or small trees with usually compound leaves and clusters of small flowers.
sumless
Not to be summed up or computed; so great that the amount can not be ascertained; incalculable; inestimable.
summarily
In a summary manner.
sunfish
A very large oceanic plectognath fish (Mola mola, Mola rotunda, or Orthagoriscus mola) having a broad body and a truncated tail.
sunbeam
A beam or ray of the sun.
sunday
Belonging to the Christian Sabbath.
sunk
Imp. & p. p. of Sink.
sung
Imp. & p. p. of Sing.
sunless
Destitute or deprived of the sun or its rays; shaded; shadowed.
swash
An oval figure, whose moldings are oblique to the axis of the work.
surtax
An additional or extra tax.
surd
Net having the sense of hearing; deaf.
supination
The act of turning the hand palm upward; also, position of the hand with the palm upward.
sunsetting
The descent of the sun below the horizon; also, the time when the sun sets; evening. Also used figuratively.
sunproof
Impervious to the rays of the sun.
sunrising
Hence, the region where the sun rises; the east.
supawn
Boiled Indian meal; hasty pudding; mush.
super
A contraction of Supernumerary, in sense  2.
sura
One of the sections or chapters of the Koran, which are one hundred and fourteen in number.
suppage
What may be supped; pottage.
supra
Over; above; before; also, beyond; besides; -- much used as a prefix.
surbase
A cornice, or series of moldings, on the top of the base of a pedestal, podium, etc. See Illust. of Column.
surcease
Cessation; stop; end.
surname
A name or appellation which is added to, or over and above, the baptismal or Christian name, and becomes a family name.
surge
A spring; a fountain.
sure
Certainly knowing and believing; confident beyond doubt; implicity trusting; unquestioning; positive.
surf
The swell of the sea which breaks upon the shore, esp. upon a sloping beach.
surlily
In a surly manner.
surmark
A mark made on the molds of a ship, when building, to show where the angles of the timbers are to be placed.
surquidry
Overweening pride; arrogance; presumption; insolence.
suroxidate
To combine with oxygen so as to form a suroxide or peroxide.
surpass
To go beyond in anything good or bad; to exceed; to excel.
surrebound
To give back echoes; to reecho.
sursanure
A wound healed or healing outwardly only.
suttee
The act of burning a widow on the funeral pile of her husband.
sustain
Hence, to keep from sinking, as in despondence, or the like; to support.
susception
The act of taking; reception.
surucucu
See Bush master, under Bush.
survene
To supervene upon; to come as an addition to.
suslik
A ground squirrel (Spermophilus citillus) of Europe and Asia. It has large cheek pouches.
suspect
Suspicious; inspiring distrust.
sutler
A person who follows an army, and sells to the troops provisions, liquors, and the like.
susurrous
Whispering; rustling; full of whispering sounds.
sutile
Done by stitching.
sutor
A kind of sirup made by the Indians of Arizona from the fruit of some cactaceous plant (probably the Cereus giganteus).
sutra
A precept; an aphorism; a brief rule.
swag
To hang or move, as something loose and heavy; to sway; to swing.
suzerain
A superior lord, to whom fealty is due; a feudal lord; a lord paramount.
sutural
Of or pertaining to a suture, or seam.
suwarrow
The giant cactus (Cereus giganteus); -- so named by the Indians of Arizona.  Called also saguaro.
swab
To clean with a mop or swab; to wipe when very wet, as after washing; as, to swab the desk of a ship.
swad
A cod, or pod, as of beans or pease.
swamp
Wet, spongy land; soft, low ground saturated with water, but not usually covered with it; marshy ground away from the seashore.
swain
A young man dwelling in the country; a rustic; esp., a cuntry gallant or lover; -- chiefly in poetry.
swale
A valley or low place; a tract of low, and usually wet, land; a moor; a fen.
swap
To strike; -- with off.
swan
Any one of numerous species of large aquatic birds belonging to Cygnus, Olor, and allied genera of the subfamily Cygninae.
sward
The grassy surface of land; that part of the soil which is filled with the roots of grass; turf.
swoon
To sink into a fainting fit, in which there is an apparent suspension of the vital functions and mental powers; to faint; -- often with away.
swig
To drink in long draughts; to gulp; as, to swig cider.
swell
To rise or be driven into waves or billows; to heave; as, in tempest, the ocean swells into waves.
sweal
To melt and run down, as the tallow of a candle; to waste away without feeding the flame.
swatch
A piece, pattern, or sample, generally of cloth.
sway
To move or wield with the hand; to swing; to wield; as, to sway the scepter.
swede
A native or inhabitant of Sweden.
sweeny
An atrophy of the muscles of the shoulder in horses; also, atrophy of any muscle in horses.
sweven
A vision seen in sleep; a dream.
swept
Imp. & p. p. of Sweep.
swerd
See Sward, n. & v.
swietenia
A genus of meliaceous trees consisting of one species (Sweitenia Mahogoni), the mahogany tree.
swift
Moving a great distance in a short time; moving with celerity or velocity; fleet; rapid; quick; speedy; prompt.
swish
To flourish, so as to make the sound swish.
swindle
To cheat defraud grossly, or with deliberate artifice; as, to swindle a man out of his property.
swill
To wash; to drench.
swim
To move progressively in water by means of strokes with the hands and feet, or the fins or the tail.
swipe
A swape or sweep. See Sweep.
swirl
To whirl, or cause to whirl, as in an eddy.
swizzle
To drink; to swill.
switch
A small, flexible twig or rod.
swive
To copulate with (a woman).
swobber
Four privileged cards, formerly used in betting at the game of whist.
swollen
Enlarged by swelling; immoderately increased; as, swollen eyes; swollen streams.
syenite
Orig., a rock composed of quartz, hornblende, and feldspar, anciently quarried at Syene, in Upper Egypt, and now called granite.
sybarite
A person devoted to luxury and pleasure; a voluptuary.
swum
Imp. & p. p. of Swim.
sword
Hence, the emblem of judicial vengeance or punishment, or of authority and power.
swough
A sound; a groan; a moan; a sough.
swung
Imp. & p. p. of Swing.
swythe
Quickly. See Swithe.
sycite
A nodule of flint, or a pebble, which resembles a fig.
sycamore
A large tree (Ficus Sycomorus) allied to the common fig.  It is found in Egypt and Syria, and is the sycamore, or sycamine, of Scripture.
sycee
Silver, pounded into ingots of the shape of a shoe, and used as currency. The most common weight is about one pound troy.
sycoceric
Of, pertaining to, or designating, an acid obtained by the oxidation of sycoceryl alcohol.
syderolite
A kind of Bohemian earthenware resembling the Wedgwood ware.
symmetral
Commensurable; symmetrical.
sylph
An imaginary being inhabiting the air; a fairy.
syle
A young herring (Clupea harengus).
syllabical
Of or pertaining to a syllable or syllables; as, syllabic accent.
sylvan
Of or pertaining to a sylva; forestlike; hence, rural; rustic.
symbol
Any character used to represent a quantity, an operation, a relation, or an abbreviation.
syncarpous
Composed of several carpels consolidated into one ovary.
sympathist
One who sympathizes; a sympathizer.
synagogue
A congregation or assembly of Jews met for the purpose of worship, or the performance of religious rites.
syne
Afterwards; since; ago.
syndactyle
Any bird having syndactilous feet.
syngenesia
A Linnaean class of plants in which the stamens are united by the anthers.
tasco
A kind of clay for making melting pots.
talipes
The deformity called clubfoot. See Clubfoot.
tacit
Done or made in silence; implied, but not expressed; silent; as, tacit consent is consent by silence, or by not interposing an objection.
syzygial
Pertaining to a syzygy.
syriac
Of or pertaining to Syria, or its language; as, the Syriac version of the Pentateuch.
syntax
Connected system or order; union of things; a number of things jointed together; organism.
synochal
Of or pertaining to synocha; like synocha.
synpelmous
Having the two main flexor tendons of the toes blended together.
syphering
The lapping of chamfered edges of planks to make a smooth surface, as for a bulkhead.
syracuse
A red wine of Italy.
syrt
A quicksand; a bog.
syrma
A long dress, trailing on the floor, worn by tragic actors in Greek and Roman theaters.
syrphian
Of or pertaining to the syrphus flies.
systaltic
Capable of, or taking place by, alternate contraction and dilatation; as, the systaltic action of the heart.
sythe
See Sith, Sithe.
tablature
A painting on a wall or ceiling; a single piece comprehended in one view, and formed according to one design; hence, a picture in general.
tabbinet
A fabric like poplin, with a watered surface.
taas
A heap. See Tas.
tabanus
A genus of blood sucking flies, including the horseflies.
tabefy
To cause to waste gradually, to emaciate.
tabid
Affected by tabes; tabetic.
tacamahaca
A bitter balsamic resin obtained from tropical American trees of the genus Elaphrium (E. tomentosum and E.
tabor
A small drum used as an accompaniment to a pipe or fife, both being played by the same person.
tabula
A table; a tablet.
tace
The cross, or church, of St. Antony. See Illust. (6), under Cross, n.
tache
Something used for taking hold or holding; a catch; a loop; a button.
tagtail
A worm which has its tail conspicuously colored.
taffy
A kind of candy made of molasses or brown sugar boiled down and poured out in shallow pans.
tact
The sense of touch; feeling.
tack
A stain; a tache.
taconic
Designating, or pertaining to, the series of rocks forming the Taconic mountains in Western New England.
tadpole
The hooded merganser.
taenia
A genus of intestinal worms which includes the common tapeworms of man. See Tapeworm.
taglia
A peculiar combination of pulleys.
tafia
A variety of rum.
tagger
One who, or that which, appends or joins one thing to another.
tagnicate
The white-lipped peccary.
tagsore
Adhesion of the tail of a sheep to the wool from excoriation produced by contact with the feces; -- called also tagbelt.
tajassu
The common, or collared, peccary.
tahitian
Of or pertaining to Tahiti, an island in the Pacific Ocean.
taguan
A large flying squirrel (Pteromys petuarista). Its body becomes two feet long, with a large bushy tail nearly as long.
taha
The African rufous-necked weaver bird (Hyphantornis texor).
tail
Limitation; abridgment.
tain
Thin tin plate; also, tin foil for mirrors.
talapoin
A small African monkey (Cercopithecus, / Miopithecus, talapoin) -- called also melarhine.
take
To gain or secure the interest or affection of; to captivate; to engage; to interest; to charm.
taking
Apt to take; alluring; attracting.
talc
A soft mineral of a soapy feel and a greenish, whitish, or grayish color, usually occurring in foliated masses.
talbot
A sort of dog, noted for quick scent and eager pursuit of game.
tale
That which is told; an oral relation or recital; any rehearsal of what has occured; narrative; discourse; statement; history; story.
tanyard
An inclosure where the tanning of leather is carried on; a tannery.
tammy
A kind of woolen, or woolen and cotton, cloth, often highly glazed, -- used for curtains, sieves, strainers, etc.
talpa
A genus of small insectivores including the common European mole.
talma
A kind of large cape, or short, full cloak, forming part of the dress of ladies.
talk
To utter words; esp., to converse familiarly; to speak, as in familiar discourse, when two or more persons interchange thoughts.
tall
Brave; bold; courageous.
talon
The claw of a predaceous bird or animal, especially the claw of a bird of prey.
talukdar
A proprietor of a talook.
tambour
A kind of small flat drum; a tambourine.
talus
A variety of clubfoot (Talipes calcaneus). See the Note under Talipes.
tamability
The quality or state of being tamable; tamableness.
tame
To broach or enter upon; to taste, as a liquor; to divide; to distribute; to deal out.
tamias
A genus of ground squirrels, including the chipmunk.
tanier
An aroid plant (Caladium sagittaefolium), the leaves of which are boiled and eaten in the West Indies.
tanager
Any one of numerous species of bright-colored singing birds belonging to Tanagra, Piranga, and allied genera.
tamp
To drive in or down by frequent gentle strokes; as, to tamp earth so as to make a smooth place.
tamping
The material used in tamping. See Tamp, v. t., 1.
tandem
One after another; -- said especially of horses harnessed and driven one before another, instead of abreast.
tang
A coarse blackish seaweed (Fuscus nodosus).
tannable
That may be tanned.
tank
A small Indian dry measure, averaging 240 grains in weight; also, a Bombay weight of 72 grains, for pearls.
tanling
One tanned by the sun.
tansy
A dish common in the seventeenth century, made of eggs, sugar, rose water, cream, and the juice of herbs, baked with butter in a shallow dish.
tant
A small scarlet arachnid.
tardation
The act of retarding, or delaying; retardation.
taplash
Bad small beer; also, the refuse or dregs of liquor.
tape
A narrow fillet or band of cotton or linen; a narrow woven fabric used for strings and the like; as, curtains tied with tape.
taoism
One of the popular religions of China, sanctioned by the state.
tapa
A kind of cloth prepared by the Polynesians from the inner bark of the paper mulberry; -- sometimes called also kapa.
taphouse
A house where liquors are retailed.
tapinage
A lurking or skulking.
tapster
One whose business is to tap or draw ale or other liquor.
tappen
An obstruction, or indigestible mass, found in the intestine of bears and other animals during hibernation.
taproom
A room where liquors are kept on tap; a barroom.
taranis
A Celtic divinity, regarded as the evil principle, but confounded by the Romans with Jupiter.
tarboosh
A red cap worn by Turks and other Eastern nations, sometimes alone and sometimes swathed with linen or other stuff to make a turban.
taro
A name for several aroid plants (Colocasia antiquorum, var. esculenta, Colocasia macrorhiza, etc.), and their rootstocks.
tariff
The duty, or rate of duty, so imposed; as, the tariff on wool; a tariff of two cents a pound.
tare
A weed that grows among wheat and other grain; -- alleged by modern naturalists to be the Lolium temulentum, or darnel.
targe
A shield or target.
tarlatan
A kind of thin, transparent muslin, used for dresses.
tarn
A mountain lake or pool.
tarragon
A plant of the genus Artemisa (A. dracunculus), much used in France for flavoring vinegar.
tarpan
A wild horse found in the region of the Caspian Sea.
tarquinish
Like a Tarquin, a king of ancient Rome; proud; haughty; overbearing.
tart
Sharp to the taste; acid; sour; as, a tart apple.
tarsal
Of or pertaining to the tarsus (either of the foot or eye).
tarweed
A name given to several resinous-glandular composite plants of California, esp. to the species of Grindelia, Hemizonia, and Madia.
teen
Grief; sorrow; affiction; pain.
taxless
Free from taxation.
taught
Imp. & p. p. of Teach.
tataupa
A South American tinamou (Crypturus tataupa).
tasmanian
Of or pertaining to Tasmania, or Van Diemen's Land. -- n. A native or inhabitant of Tasmania; specifically (Ethnol.
task
Labor or study imposed by another, often in a definite quantity or amount.
taslet
A piece of armor formerly worn to guard the things; a tasse.
tasse
A piece of armor for the thighs, forming an appendage to the ancient corselet.
tastable
Capable of worthy of being tasted; savory; relishing.
tatou
The giant armadillo (Priodontes gigas) of tropical South America. It becomes nearly five feet long including the tail.
tatch
A spot or stain; also, a trick.
tath
3d pers. sing. pres. of Ta, to take.
tatt
To make (anything) by tatting; to work at tatting; as, tatted edging.
tatusiid
Any armadillo of the family Tatusiidae, of which the peba and mule armadillo are examples. Also used adjectively.
tawer
One who taws; a dresser of white leather.
taut
Tight; stretched; not slack; -- said esp. of a rope that is tightly strained.
taunt
Very high or tall; as, a ship with taunt masts.
taur
The constellation Taurus.
taverner
One who keeps a tavern.
tawdrily
In a tawdry manner.
taxability
The quality or state of being taxable; taxableness.
tawniness
The quality or state of being tawny.
taws
A leather lash, or other instrument of punishment, used by a schoolmaster.
taxel
The American badger.
taxiarch
An Athenian military officer commanding a certain division of an army.
teapot
A vessel with a spout, in which tea is made, and from which it is poured into teacups.
teaberry
The checkerberry.
tayra
A South American carnivore (Galera barbara) allied to the grison. The tail is long and thick. The length, including the tail, is about three feet.
taxonomic
Pertaining to, or involving, taxonomy, or the laws and principles of classification; classificatory.
taxpayer
One who is assessed and pays a tax.
tazza
An ornamental cup or vase with a large, flat, shallow bowl, resting on a pedestal and often having handles.
tchawytcha
The quinnat salmon.
teakettle
A kettle in which water is boiled for making tea, coffee, etc.
teach
To accustom; to guide; to show; to admonish.
teagle
A hoisting apparatus; an elevator; a crane; a lift.
teal
Any one of several species of small fresh-water ducks of the genus Anas and the subgenera Querquedula and Nettion.
team
A group of young animals, especially of young ducks; a brood; a litter.
techily
In a techy manner.
teat
The protuberance through which milk is drawn from the udder or breast of a mammal; a nipple; a pap; a mammilla; a dug; a tit.
tear
Something in the form of a transparent drop of fluid matter; also, a solid, transparent, tear-shaped drop, as of some balsams or resins.
tease
To comb or card, as wool or flax.
teazer
The stoker or fireman of a furnace, as in glass works.
tebeth
The tenth month of the Jewish ecclesiastical year, answering to a part of December with a part of January.
tedge
The gate of a mold, through which the melted metal is poured; runner, geat.
tectly
Covertly; privately; secretly.
tedder
A machine for stirring and spreading hay, to expedite its drying.
teelseed
The seed of sesame.
tedious
Involving tedium; tiresome from continuance, prolixity, slowness, or the like; wearisome.
teem
To pour; -- commonly followed by out; as, to teem out ale.
tenon
To cut or fit for insertion into a mortise, as the end of a piece of timber.
telpher
A contrivance for the conveyance of vehicles or loads by means of electricity.
teinland
Land granted by the crown to a thane or lord.
tegmen
A tegument or covering.
teest
A tinsmith's stake, or small anvil.
teetee
A diving petrel of Australia (Halodroma wrinatrix).
tegula
A small appendage situated above the base of the wings of Hymenoptera and attached to the mesonotum.
teil
The lime tree, or linden; -- called also teil tree.
telic
Denoting the final end or purpose, as distinguished from ecbatic. See Ecbatic.
telarly
In a weblike manner.
telegram
A message sent by telegraph; a telegraphic dispatch.
tell
To mention one by one, or piece by piece; to recount; to enumerate; to reckon; to number; to count; as, to tell money.
telotrocha
An annelid larva having telotrochal bands of cilia.
tenability
The quality or state of being tenable; tenableness.
temerity
Unreasonable contempt of danger; extreme venturesomeness; rashness; as, the temerity of a commander in war.
telson
The terminal joint or movable piece at the end of the abdomen of Crustacea and other articulates. See Thoracostraca.
telugu
One of the people speaking the Telugu language.
temper
To fit together; to adjust; to accomodate.
temulency
Intoxication; inebriation; drunkenness.
tene
See 1st and 2d Teen.
tench
A European fresh-water fish (Tinca tinca, or T. vulgaris) allied to the carp. It is noted for its tenacity of life.
tend
To make a tender of; to offer or tender.
tenfold
In tens; consisting of ten in one; ten times repeated.
tennantite
A blackish lead-gray mineral, closely related to tetrahedrite. It is essentially a sulphide of arsenic and copper.
teraconic
Pertaining to, or designating, an acid obtained by the distillation of terebic acid, and homologous with citraconic acid.
tepal
A division of a perianth.
tent
A kind of wine of a deep red color, chiefly from Galicia or Malaga in Spain; -- called also tent wine, and tinta.
tenpenny
Valued or sold at ten pence; as, a tenpenny cake. See 2d Penny, n.
tense
Stretched tightly; strained to stiffness; rigid; not lax; as, a tense fiber.
tenuate
To make thin; to attenuate.
teocalli
Literally, God's house; a temple, usually of pyramidal form, such as were built by the aborigines of Mexico, Yucatan, etc.
tepid
Moderately warm; lukewarm; as, a tepid bath; tepid rays; tepid vapors.
tepee
An Indian wigwam or tent.
tephrite
An igneous rock consisting essentially of plagioclase and either leucite or nephelite, or both.
tepor
Gentle heat; moderate warmth; tepidness.
tequila
An intoxicating liquor made from the maguey in the district of Tequila, Mexico.
term
That which limits the extent of anything; limit; extremity; bound; boundary.
terebate
A salt of terebic acid.
terbic
Of, pertaining to, or containing, terbium; also, designating certain of its compounds.
tercel
See Tiercel. Called also tarsel, tassel.
tergal
Of or pertaining to back, or tergum. See Dorsal.
terin
A small yellow singing bird, with an ash-colored head; the European siskin. Called also tarin.
terra
The earth; earth.
tern
Any one of numerous species of long-winged aquatic birds, allied to the gulls, and belonging to Sterna and various allied genera.
terpilene
A polymeric form of terpene, resembling terbene.
tertian
Occurring every third day; as, a tertian fever.
terse
Appearing as if rubbed or wiped off; rubbed; smooth; polished.
terutero
The South American lapwing (Vanellus Cayennensis). Its wings are furnished with short spurs. Called also Cayenne lapwing.
usefully
In a useful manner.
tufa
A soft or porous stone formed by depositions from water, usually calcareous; -- called also calcareous tufa.
tomnoddy
A sea bird, the puffin.
tidy
The wren; -- called also tiddy.
thin
Having little thickness or extent from one surface to its opposite; as, a thin plate of metal; thin paper; a thin board; a thin covering.
thaw
To melt, dissolve, or become fluid; to soften; -- said of that which is frozen; as, the ice thaws.
tewhit
The lapwing; -- called also teewheep.
tetracolon
A stanza or division in lyric poetry, consisting of four verses or lines.
tetanic
Of or pertaining to tetanus; having the character of tetanus; as, a tetanic state; tetanic contraction.
tesselar
Formed of tesserae, as a mosaic.
test
A cupel or cupelling hearth in which precious metals are melted for trial and refinement.
tete
A kind of wig; false hair.
tether
A long rope or chain by which an animal is fastened, as to a stake, so that it can range or feed only within certain limits.
teuton
A member of the Teutonic branch of the Indo-European, or Aryan, family.
tetter
A vesicular disease of the skin; herpes. See Herpes.
teufit
The lapwing; -- called also teuchit.
tewan
A tribe of American Indians including many of the Pueblos of New Mexico and adjacent regions.
tewed
Fatigued; worn with labor or hardship.
thalamic
Of or pertaining to a thalamus or to thalami.
text
The four Gospels, by way of distinction or eminence.
tewtaw
To beat; to break, as flax or hemp.
texas
A structure on the hurricane deck of a steamer, containing the pilot house, officers' cabins, etc.
teyne
A thin plate of metal.
thacker
See Thatch, Thatcher.
thanage
The district in which a thane anciently had jurisdiction; thanedom.
tammuz
A deity among the ancient Syrians, in honor of whom the Hebrew idolatresses held an annual lamentation.
thamyn
An Asiatic deer (Rucervus Eldi) resembling the swamp deer; -- called also Eld's deer.
thar
A goatlike animal (Capra Jemlaica) native of the Himalayas. It has small, flattened horns, curved directly backward.
that
As an adjective, that has the same demonstrative force as the pronoun, but is followed by a noun.
there
In or at that place.
theft
The thing stolen.
theca
A sheath; a case; as, the theca, or cell, of an anther; the theca, or spore case, of a fungus; the theca of the spinal cord.
thea
A genus of plants found in China and Japan; the tea plant.
thebaid
A Latin epic poem by Statius about Thebes in Boeotia.
thedom
Success; fortune; luck; chance.
thee
To thrive; to prosper.
them
The objective case of they. See They.
thegn
Thane. See Thane.
theiform
Having the form of tea.
then
At that time (referring to a time specified, either past or future).
theobroma
A genus of small trees. See Cacao.
thibetan
Of or pertaining to Thibet.
theurgical
Of or pertaining to theurgy; magical.
thesaurus
A treasury or storehouse; hence, a repository, especially of knowledge; -- often applied to a comprehensive work, like a dictionary or cyclopedia.
thetical
Laid down; absolute or positive, as a law.
thew
Manner; custom; habit; form of behavior; qualities of mind; disposition; specifically, good qualities; virtues.
thialdine
A weak nitrogenous sulphur base, C6H13NS2.
thigh
The proximal segment of the hind limb between the knee and the trunk. See Femur.
thick
Dense; not thin; inspissated; as, thick vapors. Also used figuratively; as, thick darkness.
thief
One who steals; one who commits theft or larceny. See Theft.
thilk
That same; this; that.
thimble
Any thimble-shaped appendage or fixure.
thug
One of an association of robbers and murderers in India who practiced murder by stealthy approaches, and from religious motives.
thoth
The god of eloquence and letters among the ancient Egyptians, and supposed to be the inventor of writing and philosophy.
thole
A wooden or metal pin, set in the gunwale of a boat, to serve as a fulcrum for the oar in rowing.
this
As an adjective, this has the same demonstrative force as the pronoun, but is followed by a noun; as, this book; this way to town.
thionic
Of or pertaining to sulphur; containing or resembling sulphur; specifically, designating certain of the thio compounds; as, the thionic acids.
third
Next after the second; coming after two others; -- the ordinal of three; as, the third hour in the day.
thither
To that place; -- opposed to hither.
thlipsis
Compression, especially constriction of vessels by an external cause.
thooid
Of or pertaining to a group of carnivores, including the wovels and the dogs.
thomaism
The doctrine of Thomas Aquinas, esp. with respect to predestination and grace.
thong
A strap of leather; especially, one used for fastening anything.
thor
The god of thunder, and son of Odin.
those
The plural of that. See That.
thrashing
A. & n. from Thrash, v.
thresh
To beat soundly, as with a stick or whip; to drub.
thou
To address as thou, esp. to do so in order to treat with insolent familiarity or contempt.
thracian
Of or pertaining to Thrace, or its people.
thrashel
An instrument to thrash with; a flail.
thresher
One who, or that which, thrashes grain; a thrashing machine.
throat
The part of the neck in front of, or ventral to, the vertebral column.
thread
A filament, as of a flower, or of any fibrous substance, as of bark; also, a line of gold or silver.
thribble
Triple; treble; threefold.
thrum
One of the ends of weaver's threads; hence, any soft, short threads or tufts resembling these.
thryfallow
To plow for the third time in summer; to trifallow.
thysanuran
One of the Thysanura. Also used adjectively.
thuyin
A substance extracted from trees of the genus Thuja, or Thuya, and probably identical with quercitrin.
thunder
The sound which follows a flash of lightning; the report of a discharge of atmospheric electricity.
thulia
Oxide of thulium.
thumb
The short, thick first digit of the human hand, differing from the other fingers in having but two phalanges; the pollex.
thuringian
Of or pertaining to Thuringia, a country in Germany, or its people.
thus
The commoner kind of frankincense, or that obtained from the Norway spruce, the long-leaved pine, and other conifers.
thylacine
The zebra wolf. See under Wolf.
thwack
To strike with something flat or heavy; to bang, or thrash: to thump.
thwite
To cut or clip with a knife; to whittle.
thymate
A compound of thymol analogous to a salt; as, sodium thymate.
thyrohyal
One of the lower segments in the hyoid arch, often consolidated with the body of the hyoid bone and forming one of its great horns, as in man.
ticpolonga
A very venomous viper (Daboia Russellii), native of Ceylon and India; -- called also cobra monil.
tical
A bean-shaped coin of Siam, worth about sixty cents; also, a weight equal to 236 grains troy.
tiaraed
Adorned with, or wearing, a tiara.
tibia
The inner, or preaxial, and usually the larger, of the two bones of the leg or hind limb below the knee.
tice
A ball bowled to strike the ground about a bat's length in front of the wicket.
tick
Credit; trust; as, to buy on, or upon, tick.
tidde
Imp. of Tide, v. i.
tidal
Of or pertaining to tides; caused by tides; having tides; periodically rising and falling, or following and ebbing; as, tidal waters.
tidbit
A delicate or tender piece of anything eatable; a delicious morsel.
tidife
The blue titmouse.
tide
Time; period; season.
tidology
A discourse or treatise upon the tides; that part of science which treats of tides.
titillate
To tickle; as, to titillate the nose with a feather.
tine
Trouble; distress; teen.
tile
To protect from the intrusion of the uninitiated; as, to tile a Masonic lodge.
tift
A fit of pettishness, or slight anger; a tiff.
tietick
The meadow pipit.
tiebar
A flat bar used as a tie.
tier
One who, or that which, ties.
tiewig
A wig having a tie or ties, or one having some of the curls tied up; also, a wig tied upon the head.
tiff
Liquor; especially, a small draught of liquor.
tigress
The female of the tiger.
tigella
That part of an embryo which represents the young stem; the caulicle or radicle.
tigh
A close, or inclosure; a croft.
tike
A tick. See 2d Tick.
tilbury
A kind of gig or two-wheeled carriage, without a top or cover.
time
Duration, considered independently of any system of measurement or any employment of terms which designate limited portions thereof.
tilt
A covering overhead; especially, a tent.
tiliaceous
Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a natural order of plants (Tiliaceae) of which the linden (Tilia) is the type.
till
A vetch; a tare.
timal
The blue titmouse.
timbal
A kettledrum. See Tymbal.
tinamides
A division of struthious birds, including the tinamous.
timid
Wanting courage to meet danger; easily frightened; timorous; not bold; fearful; shy.
timocracy
A state in which the love of honor is the ruling motive.
tincal
Crude native borax, formerly imported from Thibet. It was once the chief source of boric compounds.  Cf.
tindal
A petty officer among lascars, or native East Indian sailors; a boatswain's mate; a cockswain.
tiptoe
The end, or tip, of the toe.
tint
A slight coloring.
tinman
A manufacturer of tin vessels; a dealer in tinware.
ting
A sharp sound, as of a bell; a tinkling.
tink
To make a sharp, shrill noise; to tinkle.
tinned
Covered, or plated, with tin; as, a tinned roof; tinned iron.
tinsel
Something shining and gaudy; something superficially shining and showy, or having a false luster, and more gay than valuable.
tipcart
A cart so constructed that the body can be easily tipped, in order to dump the load.
tinware
Articles made of tinned iron.
tiny
Very small; little; puny.
tipper
A kind of ale brewed with brackish water obtained from a particular well; -- so called from the first brewer of it, one Thomas Tipper.
tipsily
In a tipsy manner; like one tipsy.
tirralirra
A verbal imitation of a musical sound, as of the note of a lark or a horn.
tire
A tier, row, or rank. See Tier.
tipula
Any one of many species of long-legged dipterous insects belonging to Tipula and allied genera. They have long and slender bodies.
tirade
A declamatory strain or flight of censure or abuse; a rambling invective; an oration or harangue abounding in censorious and bitter language.
tirma
The oyster catcher.
tironian
Of or pertaining to Tiro, or a system of shorthand said to have been introduced by him into ancient Rome.
tisri
The seventh month of the Jewish ecclesiastical year, answering to a part of September with a part of October.
tisar
The fireplace at the side of an annealing oven.
tisical
Consumptive, phthisical.
titanate
A salt of titanic acid.
tissue
A fine transparent silk stuff, used for veils, etc.; specifically, cloth interwoven with gold or silver threads, or embossed with figures.
tithable
Subject to the payment of tithes; as, tithable lands.
tofus
Tufa. See under Tufa, and Toph.
tobacco
An American plant (Nicotiana Tabacum) of the Nightshade family, much used for smoking and chewing, and as snuff.
tiver
A kind of ocher which is used in some parts of England in marking sheep.
titrate
To analyse, or determine the strength of, by means of standard solutions.  Cf. Standardized solution, under Solution.
title
An inscription put over or upon anything as a name by which it is known.
titmal
The blue titmouse.
titter
To laugh with the tongue striking against the root of the upper teeth; to laugh with restraint, or without much noise; to giggle.
titubate
To rock or roll, as a curved body on a plane.
toad
Any one of numerous species of batrachians belonging to the genus Bufo and allied genera, especially those of the family Bufonidae.
tivy
With great speed; -- a huntsman's word or sound.
tmesis
The separation of the parts of a compound word by the intervention of one or more words; as, in what place soever, for whatsoever place.
toast
To dry and brown by the heat of a fire; as, to toast bread.
toat
The handle of a joiner's plane.
toco
A toucan (Ramphastos toco) having a very large beak. See Illust. under Toucan.
toccata
An old form of piece for the organ or harpsichord, somewhat in the free and brilliant style of the prelude, fantasia, or capriccio.
tobine
A stout twilled silk used for dresses.
toboggan
To slide down hill over the snow or ice on a toboggan.
tocher
Dowry brought by a bride to her husband.
tockay
A spotted lizard native of India.
tody
Any one of several species of small insectivorous West Indian birds of the genus Todus. They are allied to the kingfishers.
tocsin
An alarm bell, or the ringing of a bell for the purpose of alarm.
toddle
To walk with short, tottering steps, as a child.
toed
Having (such or so many) toes; -- chiefly used in composition; as, narrow-toed, four-toed.
toft
A knoll or hill.
toll
To take away; to vacate; to annul.
toise
An old measure of length in France, containing six French feet, or about 6.3946 French feet.
toggery
Clothes; garments; dress; as, fishing toggery.
toga
The loose outer garment worn by the ancient Romans, consisting of a single broad piece of woolen cloth of a shape approaching a semicircle.
together
In or into union; into junction; as, to sew, knit, or fasten two things together; to mix things together.
tohew
To hew in pieces.
toil
A net or snare; any thread, web, or string spread for taking prey; -- usually in the plural.
tola
A weight of British India. The standard tola is equal to 180 grains.
tokay
A grape of an oval shape and whitish color.
token
A memorial of friendship; something by which the friendship of another person is to be kept in mind; a memento; a souvenir.
told
Imp. & p. p. of Tell.
tole
To draw, or cause to follow, by displaying something pleasing or desirable; to allure by some bait.
tomb
A pit in which the dead body of a human being is deposited; a grave; a sepulcher.
tolu
A fragrant balsam said to have been first brought from Santiago de Tolu, in New Granada. See Balsam of Tolu, under Balsam.
tolsester
A toll or tribute of a sextary of ale, paid to the lords of some manors by their tenants, for liberty to brew and sell ale.
tolt
A writ by which a cause pending in a court baron was removed into a country court.
tolyl
The hydrocarbon radical, CH3.C6H4, regarded as characteristic of certain compounds of the aromatic series related to toluene; as, tolyl carbinol.
tomahawk
A kind of war hatchet used by the American Indians. It was originally made of stone, but afterwards of iron.
tomfool
A great fool; a trifler.
tomcat
A male cat, especially when full grown or of large size.
tome
As many writings as are bound in a volume, forming part of a larger work; a book; -- usually applied to a ponderous volume.
tomjohn
A kind of open sedan used in Ceylon, carried by a single pole on men's shoulders.
tomium
The cutting edge of the bill of a bird.
tommy
Bread, -- generally a penny roll; the supply of food carried by workmen as their daily allowance.
tralation
The use of a word in a figurative or extended sense; ametaphor; a trope.
tory
One who, in the time of the Revolution, favored submitting tothe claims of Great Britain against the colonies; an adherent tothe crown.
topless
Having no top, or no visble fop; hence, fig.: very lofty; supreme; unequaled.
tonus
Tonicity, or tone; as, muscular tonus.
tonga
A drug useful in neuralgia, derived from a Fijian plant supposed to be of the aroid genus Epipremnum.
tomrig
A rude, wild, wanton girl; a hoiden; a tomboy.
tomorrow
On the day after the present day; on the next day; on the morrow.
tompion
A stopper of a cannon or a musket. See Tampion.
tomtit
A titmouse, esp. the blue titmouse.
tone
Sound, or the character of a sound, or a sound considered as of this or that character; as, a low, high, loud, grave, acute, sweet, or harsh tone.
tonometer
An instrument for determining the rate of vibrations in tones.
tonic
Of or pertaining to tension; increasing tension; hence, increasing strength; as, tonic power.
tonnage
The weight of goods carried in a boat or a ship.
tonsil
One of the two glandular organs situated in the throat at the sides of the fauces. The tonsils are sometimes called the almonds, from their shape.
tontine
An annuity, with the benefit of survivorship, or a loan raised on life annuities with the benefit of survivorship.
tope
A moundlike Buddhist sepulcher, or memorial monument, often erected over a Buddhist relic.
toot
To stand out, or be prominent.
tool
A machine for cutting or shaping materials; -- also called machine tool.
toon
The reddish brown wood of an East Indian tree (Cedrela Toona) closely resembling the Spanish cedar; also.
toparch
The ruler or principal man in a place or country; the governor of a toparchy.
topcoat
An outer coat; an overcoat.
toph
Kind of sandstone.
topful
Full to the top, ore brim; brimfull.
topgallant
Fig.: Highest; elevated; splendid.
topiarian
Of or pertaining to the ornamental cutting and trimming of trees, hedges, etc.; practicing ornamental gardening.
topknot
A crest or knot of feathers upon the head or top, as of a bird; also, an orgamental knot worn on top of the head, as by women.
tornaria
The peculiar free swimming larva of Balanoglossus. See Illust. in Append.
torase
To scratch to pieces.
toppiece
A small wig for the top of the head; a toupee.
topman
A man stationed in the top.
topology
The art of, or method for, assisting the memory by associating the thing or subject to be remembered with some place.
topsman
The chief drover of those who drive a herd of cattle.
toque
A kind of cap worn in the 16th century, and copied in modern fashions; -- called also toquet.
tore
The dead grass that remains on mowing land in winter and spring.
torbernite
A mineral occurring in emerald-green tabular crystals having a micaceous structure.  It is a hydrous phosphate of uranium and copper.
torcher
One who gives light with a torch, or as if with a torch.
torilto
A species of Turnix (Turnix sylvatica) native of Spain and Northen Africa.
torment
An engine for casting stones.
torquated
Having or wearing a torque, or neck chain.
toppescent
Becoming torpid or numb.
torose
Cylindrical with alternate swellings and contractions; having the surface covered with rounded prominences.
torpedo
An engine or machine for destroying ships by blowing them up.
torpid
Having lost motion, or the power of exertion and feeling; numb; benumbed; as, a torpid limb.
torquate
Collared; having a torques, or distinct colored ring around the neck.
torse
A developable surface. See under Developable.
torque
A collar or neck chain, usually twisted, especially as worn by ancient barbaric nations, as the Gauls, Germans, and Britons.
torrefy
To dry by a fire.
torula
A chain of special bacteria. (b) A genus of budding fungi. Same as Saccharomyces. Also used adjectively.
tort
Mischief; injury; calamity.
torved
Stern; grim. See Torvous.
towel
A cloth used for wiping, especially one used for drying anything wet, as the person after a bath.
tottlish
Trembling or tottering, as if about to fall; un steady. 
toswink
To labor excessively.
toshred
To cut into shreads or pieces.
toscatter
To scatter in pieces; to divide.
tose
To tease, or comb, as wool.
toss
To throw with the hand; especially, to throw with the palm of the hand upward, or to throw upward; as, to toss a ball.
tost
Imp. & p. p. of Toss.
totipalmi
A division of swimming birds including those that have totipalmate feet.
total
Whole; not divided; entire; full; complete; absolute; as, a total departure from the evidence; a total loss.
tote
To carry or bear; as, to tote a child over a stream; -- a colloquial word of the Southern States, and used esp.
totter
To shake so as to threaten a fall; to vacillate; to be unsteady; to stagger; as,an old man totters with age.
totly
To walk in a wavering, unsteady manner; to toddle; to topple.
tour
A turn; a revolution; as, the tours of the heavenly bodies.
tough
Not easily broken; able to endure hardship; firm; strong; as, tough sinews.
toty
A sailor or fisherman; -- so called in some parts of the Pacific.
toucan
A modern constellation of the southern hemisphere.
touite
The wood warbler.
toupet
A little tuft; a curl or artificial lock of hair.
tout
To act as a tout. See 2d Tout.
touze
To pull; to haul; to tear; to worry.
touse
A pulling; a disturbance.
towage
The act of towing.
towboat
A vessel constructed for being towed, as a canal boat.
toyhouse
A house for children to play in or to play with; a playhouse.
towser
A familiar name for a dog.
town
Formerly: (a) An inclosure which surrounded the mere homestead or dwelling of the lord of the manor. [Obs.
towilly
The sanderling; -- so called from its cry.
towline
A line used to tow vessels; a towrope.
towpath
A path traveled by men or animals in towing boats; -- called also towing path.
towrope
A rope used in towing vessels.
toxodon
A gigantic extinct herbivorous mammal from South America, having teeth bent like a bow. It is the type of the order Toxodonta.
towy
Composed of, or like, tow.
toxical
Of or pertaining to poison; poisonous; as, toxic medicines.
toyer
One who toys; one who is full of trifling tricks; a trifler.
toyful
Full of trifling play.
trabea
A toga of purple, or ornamented with purple horizontal stripes. -- worn by kings, consuls, and augurs.
toyshop
A shop where toys are sold.
toyingly
In a toying manner.
toyman
One who deals in toys.
toze
To pull violently; to touse.
tozy
Soft, like wool that has been teased.
traffic
To pass goods and commodities from one person to another for an equivalent in goods or money; to buy or sell goods; to barter; to trade.
trace
A mark, impression, or visible appearance of anything left when the thing itself no longer exists; remains; token; vestige.
trade
A track; a trail; a way; a path; also, passage; travel; resort.
trail
To hunt by the track; to track.
tragacanth
A kind of gum procured from a spiny leguminous shrub (Astragalus gummifer) of Western Asia, and other species of Astragalus.
traject
To throw or cast through, over, or across; as, to traject the sun's light through three or more cross prisms.
trocar
A stylet, usually with a triangular point, used for exploring tissues or for inserting drainage tubes, as in dropsy.
trews
Trowsers; especially, those of the Scotch Highlanders.
tree
Any perennial woody plant of considerable size (usually over twenty feet high) and growing with a single trunk.
travail
Labor with pain; severe toil or exertion.
trap
To dress with ornaments; to adorn; -- said especially of horses.
tram
A four-wheeled truck running on rails, and used in a mine, as for carrying coal or ore.
tranation
The act of swimming over.
trash
That which is worthless or useless; rubbish; refuse.
traulism
A stammering or stuttering.
treacher
A traitor; a cheat.
trawl
To take fish, or other marine animals, with a trawl.
tray
To betray; to deceive.
treble
Threefold; triple.
treddle
A prostitute; a strumpet.
tremando
Trembling; -- used as a direction to perform a passage with a general shaking of the whole chord.
trehala
An amorphous variety of manna obtained from the nests and cocoons of a Syrian coleopterous insect (Larinus maculatus, L.
trefle
A species of time; -- so called from its resemblance in form to a trefoil.
treget
Guile; trickery.
treillage
Latticework for supporting vines, etc.; an espalier; a trellis.
trellis
A structure or frame of crossbarred work, or latticework, used for various purposes, as for screens or for supporting plants.
tresayle
A grandfather's grandfather.
trench
To cut; to form or shape by cutting; to make by incision, hewing, or the like.
trepan
A crown-saw or cylindrical saw for perforating the skull, turned, when used, like a bit or gimlet. See Trephine.
tret
3d pers. sing. pres. of Tread, for treadeth.
trevat
A weaver's cutting instrument; for severing the loops of the pile threads of velvet.
trilateral
Having three sides; being three-sided; as, a trilateral triangle.
tried
Imp. & p. p. of Try.
tribal
Of or pertaining to a tribe or tribes; as, a tribal scepter.
trey
Three, at cards, dice, or dominoes; a card, die, or domino of three spots or pips.
triable
Fit or possible to be tried; liable to be subjected to trial or test.
trica
An apothecium in certain lichens, having a spherical surface marked with spiral or concentric ridges and furrows.
tridacna
A genus of very large marine bivalve shells found on the coral reefs of the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
trihedral
Having three sides or faces; thus, a trihedral angle is a solid angle bounded by three plane angles.
trifallow
To plow the third time before sowing, as land.
trig
To fill; to stuff; to cram.
trijugate
In three pairs; as, a trijugate leaf, or a pinnate leaf with three pairs of leaflets.
trikosane
A hydrocarbon, C23H48, of the methane series, resembling paraffin; -- so called because it has twenty-three atoms of carbon in the molecule.
trireme
An ancient galley or vessel with tree banks, or tiers, of oars.
trio
Three, considered collectively; three in company or acting together; a set of three; three united.
trim
To make trim; to put in due order for any purpose; to make right, neat, or pleasing; to adjust.
trine
Threefold; triple; as, trine dimensions, or length, breadth, and thickness.
trip
To move with light, quick steps; to walk or move lightly; to skip; to move the feet nimbly; -- sometimes followed by it.
triquetrum
One of the bones of the carpus; the cuneiform. See Cuneiform (b).
triumph
A magnificent and imposing ceremonial performed in honor of a general who had gained a decisive victory over a foreign enemy.
trisagion
An ancient anthem, -- usually known by its Latin name tersanctus.See Tersanctus.
trite
Worn out; common; used until so common as to have lost novelty and interest; hackneyed; stale; as, a trite remark; a trite subject.
triweekly
Occurring or appearing three times a week; thriceweekly; as, a triweekly newspaper.
trivalence
The quality or state of being trivalent.
troat
To cry, as a buck in rutting time.
trump
A wind instrument of music; a trumpet, or sound of a trumpet; -- used chiefly in Scripture and poetry.
trover
The gaining possession of any goods, whether by finding or by other means.
trombone
The common European bittern.
troic
Pertaining to Troy; Trojan.
trod
Imp. & p. p. of Tread.
troglodyte
An anthropoid ape, as the chimpanzee.
trojan
Of or pertaining to ancient Troy or its inhabitants.
troll
To move circularly or volubly; to roll; to turn.
trope
The word or expression so used.
tron
See 3d Trone, 2. 
troop
A collection of people; a company; a number; a multitude.
trot
To proceed by a certain gait peculiar to quadrupeds; to ride or drive at a trot. See Trot, n.
troublable
Causing trouble; troublesome.
trudge
To walk or march with labor; to jog along; to move wearily.
truage
A pledge of truth or peace made on payment of a tax.
trow
A boat with an open well amidships. It is used in spearing fish.
troyounce
See Troy ounce, under Troy weight, above, and under Ounce.
trubtall
A short, squat woman.
truce
Hence, intermission of action, pain, or contest; temporary cessation; short quiet.
trug
A trough, or tray.
true
Right to precision; conformable to a rule or pattern; exact; accurate; as, a true copy; a true likeness of the original.
truffled
Provided or cooked with truffles; stuffed with truffles; as, a truffled turkey.
truism
An undoubted or self-evident truth; a statement which is pliantly true; a proposition needing no proof or argument; -- opposed to falsism.
trull
A drab; a strumpet; a harlot; a trollop.
tubbing
The forming of a tub; also, collectively, materials for tubs.
tryptic
Relating to trypsin or to its action; produced by trypsin; as, trypsin digestion.
truth
The quality or being true; as: -- (a) Conformity to fact or reality; exact accordance with that which is, or has been; or shall be.
truncal
Of or pertaining to the trunk, or body.
trusion
The act of pushing or thrusting.
trygon
Any one of several species of large sting rays belonging to Trygon and allied genera.
trying
Adapted to try, or put to severe trial; severe; afflictive; as, a trying occasion or position.
tschego
A West African anthropoid ape allied to the gorilla and chimpanzee, and by some considered only a variety of the chimpanzee.
tryst
An appointment to meet; also, an appointed place or time of meeting; as, to keep tryst; to break tryst.
tsar
The title of the emperor of Russia. See Czar.
tsetse
A venomous two-winged African fly (Glossina morsitans) whose bite is very poisonous, and even fatal, to horses and cattle, but harmless to men.
tuba
An ancient trumpet.
tucan
The Mexican pocket gopher (Geomys Mexicanus). It resembles the common pocket gopher of the Western United States, but is larger.
tubicinate
To blow a trumpet.
tube
A hollow cylinder, of any material, used for the conveyance of fluids, and for various other purposes; a pipe.
tubfish
The sapphirine gurnard (Trigla hirundo). See Illust. under Gurnard.
tubman
One of the two most experienced barristers in the Court of Exchequer.  Cf. Postman, 2.
tubular
Having the form of a tube, or pipe; consisting of a pipe; fistular; as, a tubular snout; a tubular calyx.
tuck
A long, narrow sword; a rapier.
tucet
See Tucket, a steak.
tuch
A dark-colored kind of marble; touchstone.
tudor
Of or pertaining to a royal line of England, descended from Owen Tudor of Wales, who married the widowed queen of Henry V.
tucum
A fine, strong fiber obtained from the young leaves of a Brazilian palm (Astrocaryum vulgare), used for cordage, bowstrings, etc.
tuesday
The third day of the week, following Monday and preceding Wednesday.
unglaze
To strip of glass; to remove the glazing, or glass, from, as a window.
ubiquitary
One who exists everywhere.
tutrix
A female guardian; a tutoress.
tupelo
A North American tree (Nyssa multiflora) of the Dogwood family, having brilliant, glossy foliage and acid red berries.
tumor
A morbid swelling, prominence, or growth, on any part of the body; especially, a growth produced by deposition of new tissue; a neoplasm.
tulip
Any plant of the liliaceous genus Tulipa. Many varieties are cultivated for their beautiful, often variegated flowers.
tulle
In plate armor, a suspended plate in from of the thigh. See Illust. of Tasses.
tuft
A collection of small, flexible, or soft things in a knot or bunch; a waving or bending and spreading cluster; as, a tuft of flowers or feathers.
tuggingly
In a tugging manner; with laborious pulling.
tuition
Superintending care over a young person; the particular watch and care of a tutor or guardian over his pupil or ward; guardianship.
tule
A large bulrush (Scirpus lacustris, and S. Tatora) growing abundantly on overflowed land in California and elsewhere.
tumefy
To swell; to cause to swell, or puff up.
tull
To allure; to tole.
tumble
To roll over, or to and fro; to throw one's self about; as, a person on pain tumbles and tosses.
tumid
Swelled, enlarged, or distended; as, a tumid leg; tumid flesh.
tummals
A great quantity or heap.
tungstate
A salt of tungstic acid; a wolframate.
tuna
The Opuntia Tuna. See Prickly pear, under Prickly.
tump
A little hillock; a knoll.
tumular
Consisting in a heap; formed or being in a heap or hillock.
tundra
A rolling, marshy, mossy plain of Northern Siberia.
tune
A sound; a note; a tone.
tunk
A sharp blow; a thump.
tunhoof
Ground ivy; alehoof.
tunic
A membrane, or layer of tissue, especially when enveloping an organ or part, as the eye.
tunnel
A vessel with a broad mouth at one end, a pipe or tube at the other, for conveying liquor, fluids, etc.
tupal
Any one of the tupaiids.
turm
A troop; a company.
tureen
A large, deep vessel for holding soup, or other liquid food, at the table.
turban
A kind of headdress worn by women.
tupman
A man who breeds, or deals in tups.
turacin
A red or crimson pigment obtained from certain feathers of several species of turacou; whence the name.
turcism
A mode of speech peculiar to the Turks; a Turkish idiom or expression; also, in general, a Turkish mode or custom.
turdus
A genus of singing birds including the true thrushes.
turio
A shoot or sprout from the ground.
turf
Peat, especially when prepared for fuel. See Peat.
turgent
Rising into a tumor, or a puffy state; swelling; tumid; as, turgent humors.
turk
A member of any of numerous Tartar tribes of Central Asia, etc.; esp., one of the dominant race in Turkey.
turlupin
One of the precursors of the Reformation; -- a nickname corresponding to Lollard, etc.
turtle
Any one of the numerous species of Testudinata, especially a sea turtle, or chelonian.
turpeth
A heavy yellow powder, Hg3O2SO4, which consists of a basic mercuric sulphate; -- called also turpeth mineral.
turn
To change from a given use or office; to divert, as to another purpose or end; to transfer; to use or employ; to apply; to devote.
turonian
One of the subdivisions into which the Upper Cretaceous formation of Europe is divided.
turquoise
Having a fine light blue color, like that of choice mineral turquoise.
turrel
A certain tool used by coopers.
tusk
One of the elongated incisor or canine teeth of the wild boar, elephant, etc.; hence, any long, protruding tooth.
tuscan
A native or inhabitant of Tuscany.
tush
An exclamation indicating check, rebuke, or contempt; as, tush, tush! do not speak of it.
tutelage
The act of guarding or protecting; guardianship; protection; as, the king's right of seigniory and tutelage.
tussicular
Of or pertaining to a cough.
tutor
One who guards, protects, watches over, or has the care of, some person or thing.
twopenny
Of the value of twopence.
twentieth
Next in order after the nineteenth; tenth after the tenth; coming after nineteen others; -- the ordinal of twenty.
twang
A tang. See Tang a state.
tuyere
A nozzle, mouthpiece, or fixture through which the blast is delivered to the interior of a blast furnace, or to the fire of a forge.
tutsan
A plant of the genus Hypericum (H. Androsoemum), from which a healing ointment is prepared in Spain; -- called also parkleaves.
tutti
All; -- a direction for all the singers or players to perform together.
twaddle
To talk in a weak and silly manner, like one whose faculties are decayed; to prate; to prattle.
twain
Two; -- nearly obsolete in common discourse, but used in poetry and burlesque.
tweague
A pinching condition; perplexity; trouble; distress.
twattle
To prate; to talk much and idly; to gabble; to chatter; to twaddle; as, a twattling gossip.
twayblade
Any one of several orchidaceous plants which have only two leaves, as the species of Listera and of Liparis.
tweedle
To handle lightly; -- said with reference to awkward fiddling; hence, to influence as if by fiddling; to coax; to allure.
twelfth
Next in order after the eleventh; coming after eleven others; -- the ordinal of twelve.
twilight
Faint light; a dubious or uncertain medium through which anything is viewed.
twiddle
To touch lightly, or play with; to tweedle; to twirl; as, to twiddle one's thumbs; to twiddle a watch key.
twibil
A tool for making mortises.
twice
Two times; once and again.
twifallow
To plow, or fallow, a second time (land that has been once fallowed).
twig
To twitch; to pull; to tweak.
twist
To contort; to writhe; to complicate; to crook spirally; to convolve.
twin
Being one of two born at a birth; as, a twin brother or sister.
twire
A twisted filament; a thread.
twitch
The act of twitching; a pull with a jerk; a short, sudden, quick pull; as, a twitch by the sleeve.
twofold
Double; duplicate; multiplied by two; as, a twofold nature; a twofold sense; a twofold argument.
type
The mark or impression of something; stamp; impressed sign; emblem.
tylopoda
A tribe of ungulates comprising the camels.
tyer
One who ties, or unites.
tychonic
Of or pertaining to Tycho Brahe, or his system of astronomy.
tycoon
The title by which the shogun, or former commander in chief of the Japanese army, was known to foreigners.
tying
The act or process of washing ores in a buddle.
tylarus
One of the pads on the under surface of the toes of birds.
tynd
To shut; to close.
tymbal
A kind of kettledrum.
tymp
A hollow water-cooled iron casting in the upper part of the archway in which the dam stands.
tyne
To become lost; to perish.
typal
Relating to a type or types; belonging to types; serving as a type; typical.
tyrian
Of or pertaining to Tyre or its people.
typocosmy
A representation of the world.
typhlitis
Inflammation of the caecum.
typical
Of the nature of a type; representing something by a form, model, or resemblance; emblematic; prefigurative.
tyranness
A female tyrant.
tyre
Attire. See 2d and 3d Tire.
tystie
The black guillemot.
tyro
A beginner in learning; one who is in the rudiments of any branch of study; a person imperfectly acquainted with a subject; a novice.
tysonite
A fluoride of the cerium metals occurring in hexagonal crystals of a pale yellow color.   Cf. Fluocerite.
uberous
Fruitful; copious; abundant; plentiful.
tzar
The emperor of Russia.  See Czar.
ubiety
The quality or state of being in a place; local relation; position or location; whereness.
unassuming
Not assuming; not bold or forward; not arrogant or presuming; humble; modest; retiring; as, an unassuming youth; unassuming manners.
ulster
A long, loose overcoat, worn by men and women, originally made of frieze from Ulster, Ireland.
ulexite
A mineral occurring in white rounded crystalline masses. It is a hydrous borate of lime and soda.
ugrian
A Mongolian race, ancestors of the Finns.
udder
The glandular organ in which milk is secreted and stored; -- popularly called the bag in cows and other quadrupeds.
uchees
A tribe of North American Indians belonging to the Creek confederation.
udal
In Shetland and Orkney, a freehold; property held by udal, or allodial, right.
uglify
To disfigure; to make ugly.
ugly
Offensive to the sight; contrary to beauty; being of disagreeable or loathsome aspect; unsightly; repulsive; deformed.
ukase
In Russia, a published proclamation or imperial order, having the force of law.
ugsome
Ugly; offensive; loathsome.
uhlan
One of a certain description of militia among the Tartars.
ularburong
A large East Indian nocturnal tree snake (Dipsas dendrophila). It is not venomous.
ulcer
Fig.: Anything that festers and corrupts like an open sore; a vice in character.
ulmic
Pertaining to ulmin; designating an acid obtained from ulmin.
ullet
A European owl (Syrnium aluco) of a tawny color; -- called also uluia.
uliginous
Muddy; oozy; slimy; also, growing in muddy places.
ullage
The amount which a vessel, as a cask, of liquor lacks of being full; wantage; deficiency.
ullmannite
A brittle mineral of a steel-gray color and metallic luster, containing antimony, arsenic, sulphur, and nickel.
ulmaceous
Of or pertaining to a suborder of urticaceous plants, of which the elm is the type.
ulodendron
A genus of fossil trees.
ulmus
A genus of trees including the elm.
ulna
The postaxial bone of the forearm, or branchium, corresponding to the fibula of the hind limb. See Radius.
ulonata
A division of insects nearly equivalent to the true Orthoptera.
ulotrichan
Of or pertaining to the Ulotrichi.
umlaut
The euphonic modification of a root vowel sound by the influence of a, u, or especially i, in the syllable which formerly followed.
umbecast
To cast about; to consider; to ponder.
ultra
Going beyond others, or beyond due limit; extreme; fanatical; uncompromising; as, an ultra reformer; ultra measures.
ulterior
Situated beyond, or on the farther side; thither; -- correlative with hither.
ultima
Most remote; furthest; final; last.
ulula
A genus of owls including the great gray owl (Ulula cinerea) of Arctic America, and other similar species.
ulva
A genus of thin papery bright green seaweeds including the kinds called sea lettuce.
umbo
The boss of a shield, at or near the middle, and usually projecting, sometimes in a sharp spike.
umbilic
The navel; the center.
umbles
The entrails and coarser parts of a deer; hence, sometimes, entrails, in general.
umbra
The central dark portion, or nucleus, of a sun spot.
umhofo
An African two-horned rhinoceros (Atelodus, / Rhinoceros, simus); -- called also chukuru, and white rhinoceros.
unaffected
Not affected or moved; destitute of affection or emotion; uninfluenced.
unabridged
Not abridged, or shortened; full; complete; entire; whole.
umpirage
The office of an umpire; the power, right, or authority of an umpire to decide.
umquhile
Some time ago; formerly.
unactive
Inactive; listless.
unadvised
Not prudent; not discreet; ill advised.
unambition
The absence of ambition.
unaidable
Incapable of being aided.
unalist
An ecclesiastical who holds but one benefice; -- distinguished from pluralist.
unappalled
Not appalled; not frightened; dauntless; undaunted.
unanchor
To loose from the anchor, as a ship.
unargued
Not argued or debated.
undrape
To strip of drapery; to uncover or unveil.
unce
An ounce; a small portion.
unbias
To free from bias or prejudice.
unaware
Not aware; not noticing; giving no heed; thoughtless; inattentive.
unatonable
Not capable of being brought into harmony; irreconcilable.
unavoided
Not avoided or shunned.
unbacked
Never mounted by a rider; unbroken.
unbe
To cause not to be; to cause to be another.
unbrace
To free from tension; to relax; to loose; as, to unbrace a drum; to unbrace the nerves.
unbless
To deprive of blessings; to make wretched.
unbody
To free from the body; to disembody.
unbuckle
To loose the buckles of; to unfasten; as, to unbuckle a shoe.
uncage
To loose, or release, from, or as from, a cage.
unction
That which is used for anointing; an unguent; an ointment; hence, anything soothing or lenitive.
unclasp
To loose the clasp of; to open, as something that is fastened, or as with, a clasp; as, to unclasp a book; to unclasp one's heart.
unchain
To free from chains or slavery; to let loose.
uncia
A twelfth part, as of the Roman as; an ounce.
unco
Unknown; strange, or foreign; unusual, or surprising; distant in manner; reserved.
uncreate
To deprive of existence; to annihilate.
unde
Waving or wavy; -- applied to ordinaries, or division lines.
unculpable
Inculpable; not blameworthy.
undam
To free from a dam, mound, or other obstruction.
undigenous
Generated by water.
undo
To reverse, as what has been done; to annul; to bring to naught.
uneven
Not even; not level; not uniform; rough; as, an uneven road or way; uneven ground.
unelastic
Not elastic; inelastic.
undying
Not dying; imperishable; unending; immortal; as, the undying souls of men.
undue
Not due; not yet owing; as, an undue debt, note, or bond.
undwelt
Not lived (in); -- with in.
uneared
Not eared, or plowed.
unedge
To deprive of the edge; to blunt.
unequal
Ill balanced or matched; disproportioned; hence, not equitable; partial; unjust; unfair.
unembodied
Free from a corporeal body; disembodied; as, unembodied spirits.
unencumber
To free from incumbrance; to disencumber.
unerring
Committing no mistake; incapable or error or failure certain; sure; unfailing; as, the unerring wisdom of God.
unethes
With difficulty; scarcely. See Uneath.
unfold
To open the folds of; to expand; to spread out; as, to unfold a tablecloth.
unfeather
To deprive of feathers; to strip.
unexact
Not exact; inexact.
unface
To remove the face or cover from; to unmask; to expose.
unfile
To remove from a file or record.
unfledged
Not fledged; not feathered; hence, not fully developed; immature.
ungain
Ungainly; clumsy; awkward; also, troublesome; inconvenient.
unframe
To take apart, or destroy the frame of.
unfumed
Not exposed to fumes; not fumigated.
ungifted
Being without gifts, especially native gifts or endowments.
ungear
To strip of gear; to unharness; to throw out of gear.
ungka
The siamang; -- called also ungka ape.
upas
A tree (Antiaris toxicaria) of the Breadfruit family, common in the forests of Java and the neighboring islands.
unpeace
Absence or lack of peace.
unjointed
Disjointed; unconnected; hence, incoherent.
unifacial
Having but one front surface; as, some foliaceous corals are unifacial, the polyp mouths being confined to one surface.
unhide
To bring out from concealment; to discover.
ungual
Of or pertaining to a nail, claw, talon, or hoof, or resembling one.
ungod
To deprive of divinity; to undeify.
ungraceful
Not graceful; not marked with ease and dignity; deficient in beauty and elegance; inelegant; awkward; as, ungraceful manners; ungraceful speech.
unhair
To deprive of hair, or of hairs; as, to unhair hides for leather.
unhead
To take out the head of; as, to unhead a cask.
uniate
A member of the Greek Church, who nevertheless acknowledges the supremacy of the Pope of Rome; one of the United Greeks.
unhoard
To take or steal from a hoard; to pilfer.
unhuman
Not human; inhuman.
unicameral
Having, or consisting of, a single chamber; -- said of a legislative assembly.
unideaed
Having no ideas; senseless; frivolous.
unipara
A woman who has borne one child.
unilabiate
Having one lip only; as, a unilabiate corolla.
unigenous
Being of one kind; being of the same genus.
unijugate
Having but one pair of leaflets; -- said of a pinnate leaf.
unimproved
Not improved; not made better or wiser; not advanced in knowledge, manners, or excellence.
unio
Any one of numerous species of fresh-water mussels belonging to Unio and many allied genera.
uniseptate
Having but one septum, or partition; -- said of two-celled fruits, such as the silicles of cruciferous plants.
unique
Being without a like or equal; unmatched; unequaled; unparalleled; single in kind or excellence; sole.
uniramous
Having but one branch.
unit
A single thing or person.
univalence
The quality or state of being univalent.
unmingle
To separate, as things mixed.
unlearn
To forget, as what has been learned; to lose from memory; also, to learn the contrary of.
unkind
Having no race or kindred; childless.
unjust
Acting contrary to the standard of right; not animated or controlled by justice; false; dishonest; as, an unjust man or judge.
unke
A European aquatic toad (Bombinator igneus).  Its back is dark; its belly is marked with crimson. Called also feuerkrote.
unknight
To deprive of knighthood.
unlabored
Not produced by labor or toil.
unluckily
In an unlucky manner.
unlicked
Not licked; hence, not properly formed; ungainly.  Cf. To lick into shape, under Lick, v.
unload
To take the load from; to discharge of a load or cargo; to disburden; as, to unload a ship; to unload a beast.
unmade
Not yet made or formed; as, an unmade grave.
unmeaning
Having no meaning or signification; as, unmeaning words.
unnotify
To retract or withdraw a notice of.
unnail
To remove the nails from; to unfasten by removing nails.
unmould
To change the form of; to reduce from any form.
unmuffle
To take a covering from, as the face; to uncover.
unnear
Not near; not close to; at a distance from.
unhooked
Without nooks and corners; guileless.
unorder
To countermand an order for.
unnumbered
Not numbered; not counted or estimated; innumerable.
unoil
To remove the oil from.
unowed
Not owed; as, to pay money unowed.
unossified
Destitute of a bony structure.
unpack
To separate and remove, as things packed; to open and remove the contents of; as, to unpack a trunk.
unswaddle
To take a swaddle from; to unswathe.
unsad
Unsteady; fickle.
unqualify
To disqualify; to unfit.
unpoised
Not poised or balanced.
unpick
To pick out; to undo by picking.
unplaid
To deprive of a plaid.
unpraise
To withhold praise from; to deprive of praise.
unpucker
To smooth away the puckers or wrinkles of.
unriddle
To read the riddle of; to solve or explain; as, to unriddle an enigma or a mystery.
unravel
To disentangle; to disengage or separate the threads of; as, to unravel a stocking.
unread
Not read or perused; as, an unread book.
unrobe
To disrobe; to undress; to take off the robes.
unrude
Not rude; polished.
unslacked
Not slacked; unslaked; as, unslacked lime.
unshackle
To loose from shackles or bonds; to set free from restraint; to unfetter.
unscale
To divest of scales; to remove scales from.
unseal
To break or remove the seal of; to open, as what is sealed; as, to unseal a letter.
unsight
Doing or done without sight; not seeing or examining.
unskill
Want of skill; ignorance; unskillfulness.
unsquire
To divest of the title or privilege of an esquire.
unsociable
Not sociable; not inclined to society; averse to companionship or conversation; solitary; reserved; as, an unsociable person or temper.
unspar
To take the spars, stakes, or bars from.
unstable
Not stable; not firm, fixed, or constant; subject to change or overthrow.
unsuccess
Want of success; failure; misfortune.
unusage
Want or lack of usage.
unthrifty
Not thrifty; profuse.
unteach
To cause to forget, or to lose from memory, or to disbelieve what has been taught.
unsympathy
Absence or lack of sympathy.
untack
To separate, as what is tacked; to disjoin; to release.
unthank
No thanks; ill will; misfortune.
untrift
Want of thrift; untriftiness; prodigality.
untraded
Not dealt with in trade; not visited for purposes of trade.
untidy
Unseasonable; untimely.
unto
To; -- now used only in antiquated, formal, or scriptural style. See To.
untuck
To unfold or undo, as a tuck; to release from a tuck or fold.
untwain
To rend in twain; to tear in two.
unwearied
Not wearied; not fatigued or tired; hence, persistent; not tiring or wearying; indefatigable.
unvicar
To deprive of the position or office a vicar.
unvaluable
Invaluable; being beyond price.
unveil
To remove a veil from; to divest of a veil; to uncover; to disclose to view; to reveal; as, she unveiled her face.
unvote
To reverse or annul by vote, as a former vote.
unware
Unaware; not foreseeing; being off one's guard.
unwoman
To deprive of the qualities of a woman; to unsex.
unwhole
Not whole; unsound.
unwieldy
Not easily wielded or carried; unmanageable; bulky; ponderous.
unyoke
To loose or free from a yoke.
unwrap
To open or undo, as what is wrapped or folded.
unzoned
Not zoned; not bound with a girdle; as, an unzoned bosom.
upupa
A genus of birds which includes the common hoopoe.
upmost
Highest; topmost; uppermost.
upgather
To gather up; to contract; to draw together.
upcast
Cast up; thrown upward; as, with upcast eyes.
upblow
To blow up; as, the wind upblows from the sea.
upbar
To fasten with a bar.
upbear
To bear up; to raise aloft; to support in an elevated situation; to sustain.
upbraid
To reprove severely; to rebuke; to chide.
upbuoyance
The act of buoying up; uplifting.
updive
To spring upward; to rise.
upclimb
To climb up; to ascend.
upcoil
To coil up; to make into a coil, or to be made into a coil.
upend
To end up; to set on end, as a cask.
upflow
To flow or stream up.
uphill
Upwards on, or as on, a hillside; as, to walk uphill.
upgush
A gushing upward.
upgive
To give up or out.
upgrowth
The process or result of growing up; progress; development.
uphaf
Imp. of Upheave.
upheaped
Piled up; accumulated.
uplean
To lean or incline upon anything.
uphold
To hold up; to lift on high; to elevate.
upland
The country, as distinguished from the neighborhood of towns.
uplift
To lift or raise aloft; to raise; to elevate; as, to uplift the arm; to uplift a rock.
uplook
To look or gaze up.
upshoot
To shoot upward.
upraise
To raise; to lift up.
uppile
To pile, or heap, up.
upon
On; -- used in all the senses of that word, with which it is interchangeable.
uppent
A Pent up; confined.
upplight
Imp. & p. p. of Uppluck.
uppricked
Upraised; erect; -- said of the ears of an animal.
uproar
Great tumult; violent disturbance and noise; noisy confusion; bustle and clamor.
uprear
To raise; to erect.
upridged
Raised up in a ridge or ridges; as, a billow upridged.
uprun
To run up; to ascend.
upseek
To seek or strain upward.
upswarm
To rise, or cause to rise, in a swarm or swarms.
upspear
To grow or shoot up like a spear; as, upspearing grass.
upside
The upper side; the part that is uppermost.
upsoar
To soar or mount up.
upstairs
Up the stairs; in or toward an upper story.
upsun
The time during which the sun is up, or above the horizon; the time between sunrise and sunset.
upthrow
See Throw, n., 9.
upsyturvy
Upside down; topsy-turvy.
uptake
To take into the hand; to take up; to help.
uptrace
To trace up or out.
uptown
To or in the upper part of a town; as, to go uptown.
upturn
To turn up; to direct upward; to throw up; as, to upturn the ground in plowing.
urnal
Of or pertaining to an urn; effected by an urn or urns.
urchin
A sea urchin. See Sea urchin.
ural
Pertaining to, or designating, the Urals, a mountain range between Europe and Asia.
upwreath
To rise with a curling motion; to curl upward, as smoke.
upwards
In the upper parts; above.
upwhirl
To rise upward in a whirl; to raise upward with a whirling motion.
urachus
A cord or band of fibrous tissue extending from the bladder to the umbilicus.
uraemia
Accumulation in the blood of the principles of the urine, producing dangerous disease.
urban
Of or belonging to a city or town; as, an urban population.
uranate
A salt of uranic acid.
urate
A salt of uric acid; as, sodium urate; ammonium urate.
urbicolae
An extensive family of butterflies, including those known as skippers (Hesperiadae).
urcelate
Shaped like a pitcher or urn; swelling below, and contrasted at the orifice, as a calyx or corolla.
ureter
The duct which conveys the urine from the kidney to the bladder or cloaca. There are two ureters, one for each kidney.
urechitin
A glucoside extracted from the leaves of a certain plant (Urechitis suberecta) as a bitter white crystalline substance.
urdu
The language more generally called Hindustanee.
urea
A very soluble crystalline body which is the chief constituent of the urine in mammals and some other animals.
uredo
One of the stages in the life history of certain rusts (Uredinales), regarded at one time as a distinct genus.
ureide
Any one of the many complex derivatives of urea; thus, hydantoin, and, in an extended dense, guanidine, caffeine, et.
urim
A part or decoration of the breastplate of the high priest among the ancient Jews, by which Jehovah revealed his will on certain occasions.
urge
To press; to push; to drive; to impel; to force onward.
uric
Of or pertaining to urine; obtained from urine; as, uric acid.
urinal
A vessel for holding urine; especially, a bottle or tube for holding urine for inspection.
urite
One of the segments of the abdomen or post-abdomen of arthropods.
urrhodin
Indigo red, a product of the decomposition, or oxidation, of indican. It is sometimes found in the sediment of pathological urines.
urohyal
Of or pertaining to one or more median and posterior elements in the hyoidean arch of fishes.
urocele
A morbid swelling of the scrotum due to extravasation of urine into it.
urnful
As much as an urn will hold; enough to fill an urn.
urobilin
A yellow pigment identical with hydrobilirubin, abundant in the highly colored urine of fever, and also present in normal urine.
urodela
An order of amphibians having the tail well developed and often long. It comprises the salamanders, tritons, and allied animals.
urogastric
Behind the stomach; -- said of two lobes of the carapace of certain crustaceans.
uropodal
Of or pertaining to a uropod.
uromere
Any one of the abdominal segments of an arthropod.
uronology
That part of medicine which treats of urine.
urosacral
Of or pertaining to both the caudal and sacral parts of the vertebral column; as, the urosacral vertebrae of birds.
uroxanate
A salt of uroxanic acid.
urtica
A genus of plants including the common nettles. See Nettle, n.
ursiform
Having the shape of a bear.
urry
A sort of blue or black clay lying near a vein of coal.
ursa
Either one of the Bears. See the Phrases below.
urson
The Canada porcupine. See Porcupine.
ursuk
The bearded seal.
usable
Capable of being used.
urubu
The black vulture (Catharista atrata). It ranges from the Southern United States to South America. See Vulture.
urus
A very large, powerful, and savage extinct bovine animal (Bos urus / primigenius) anciently abundant in Europe.
usance
Use; usage; employment.
usage
The act of using; mode of using or treating; treatment; conduct with respect to a person or a thing; as, good usage; ill usage; hard usage.
usbeks
A Turkish tribe which about the close of the 15th century conquered, and settled in, that part of Asia now called Turkestan.
wedlock
The ceremony, or the state, of marriage; matrimony.
vile
Low; base; worthless; mean; despicable.
vaudeville
A theatrical piece, usually a comedy, the dialogue of which is intermingled with light or satirical songs, set to familiar airs.
vairy
Charged with vair; variegated with shield-shaped figures. See Vair.
uvate
A conserve made of grapes.
usure
To practice usury; to charge unlawful interest.
usquebaugh
A compound distilled spirit made in Ireland and Scotland; whisky.
usitative
Denoting usual or customary action.
user
Enjoyment of property; use.
usher
An under teacher, or assistant master, in a school.
usnea
A genus of lichens, most of the species of which have long, gray, pendulous, and finely branched fronds.
usnic
Pertaining to, or designating, a complex acid obtained, as a yellow crystalline substance, from certain genera of lichens  (Usnea, Parmelia, etc.
ustulate
Blackened as if burned.
ustion
The act of burning, or the state of being burned.
ustorious
Having the quality of burning.
usual
Such as is in common use; such as occurs in ordinary practice, or in the ordinary course of events; customary; ordinary; habitual; common.
usufruct
The right of using and enjoying the profits of an estate or other thing belonging to another, without impairing the substance.
utmost
The most that can be; the farthest limit; the greatest power, degree, or effort; as, he has done his utmost; try your utmost.
uterine
Of or instrument to the uterus, or womb.
utas
The eighth day after any term or feast; the octave; as, the utas of St. Michael.
utensil
That which is used; an instrument; an implement; especially, an instrument or vessel used in a kitchen, or in domestic and farming business.
utes
An extensive tribe of North American Indians of the Shoshone stock, inhabiting Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, and adjacent regions.
utile
Profitable; useful.
utricle
A little sac or vesicle, as the air cell of fucus, or seaweed.
utopia
An imaginary island, represented by Sir Thomas More, in a work called Utopia, as enjoying the greatest perfection in politics, laws, and the like.
utraquist
One who receives the eucharist in both kinds; esp., one of a body of Hussites who in the 15th century fought for the right to do this.
utro
- (/). A combining form used in anatomy to indicate connection with, or relation to, the uterus; as in utro-ovarian.
utter
Situated on the outside, or extreme limit; remote from the center; outer.
vadantes
An extensive artificial group of birds including the wading, swimming, and cursorial birds.
uzema
A Burman measure of twelve miles.
uvitonic
Pertaining to, or designating, an acid which is obtained as a white crystalline substance by the action of ammonia on pyrotartaric acid.
uvea
The posterior pigmented layer of the iris; -- sometimes applied to the whole iris together with the choroid coat.
uveous
Resembling a grape.
uvula
The pendent fleshy lobe in the middle of the posterior border of the soft palate.
uxorial
Dotingly fond of, or servilely submissive to, a wife; uxorious; also, becoming a wife; pertaining to a wife.
vacher
A keeper of stock or cattle; a herdsman.
vacancy
The quality or state of being vacant; emptiness; hence, freedom from employment; intermission; leisure; idleness; listlessness.
vaccary
A cow house, dairy house, or cow pasture.
vacillancy
The quality or state of being vacillant, or wavering.
vacuate
To make void, or empty.
vagous
Wandering; unsettled.
vafrous
Crafty; cunning; sly; as, vafrous tricks.
vade
To fade; hence, to vanish.
vadimony
A bond or pledge for appearance before a judge on a certain day.
vagabond
Moving from place to place without a settled habitation; wandering.
vagient
Crying like a child.
vail
Avails; profit; return; proceeds.
vagrancy
The quality or state of being a vagrant; a wandering without a settled home; an unsettled condition; vagabondism.
vague
Wandering; vagrant; vagabond.
vaimure
An outer, or exterior. wall. See Vauntmure.
vain
Having no real substance, value, or importance; empty; void; worthless; unsatisfying.
vanquish
To conquer, overcome, or subdue in battle, as an enemy.
valvata
A genus of small spiral fresh-water gastropods having an operculum.
valiancy
The quality or state of being valiant; bravery; valor.
valance
Hanging drapery for a bed, couch, window, or the like, especially that which hangs around a bedstead, from the bed to the floor.
vaishnava
A worshiper of the god Vishnu in any of his incarnations.
vakeel
A native attorney or agent; also, an ambassador.
vale
A tract of low ground, or of land between hills; a valley.
valhalla
The palace of immortality, inhabited by the souls of heroes slain in battle.
valonia
A genus of marine green algae, in which the whole frond consists of a single oval or cylindrical cell, often an inch in length.
valkyrian
Of or pertaining to the Valkyrias; hence, relating to battle.
vallancy
A large wig that shades the face.
valsalvian
Of or pertaining to Valsalva, an Italian anatomist of the 17th century.
valuable
Worthy; estimable; deserving esteem; as, a valuable friend; a valuable companion.
vandal
Hence, one who willfully destroys or defaces any work of art or literature.
vamose
To depart quickly; to depart from.
valylene
A volatile liquid hydrocarbon, C5H6, related to ethylene and acetylene, but possessing the property of unsaturation in the third degree.
vambrace
The piece designed to protect the arm from the elbow to the wrist.
vamp
To advance; to travel.
vanadate
A salt of vanadic acid.
vang
A rope to steady the peak of a gaff.
vane
A contrivance attached to some elevated object for the purpose of showing which way the wind blows; a weathercock.
vanfess
A ditch on the outside of the counterscarp, usually full of water.
vanilla
A genus of climbing orchidaceous plants, natives of tropical America.
vanner
A machine for concentrating ore. See Frue vanner.
varlet
A servant, especially to a knight; an attendant; a valet; a footman.
vapulation
The act of beating or whipping.
vanward
Being on, or towards, the van, or front.
vansire
An ichneumon (Herpestes galera) native of Southern Africa and Madagascar. It is reddish brown or dark brown, grizzled with white.
vantage
Superior or more favorable situation or opportunity; gain; profit; advantage.
vapid
Having lost its life and spirit; dead; spiritless; insipid; flat; dull; unanimated; as, vapid beer; a vapid speech; a vapid state of the blood.
vapor
Any substance in the gaseous, or aeriform, state, the condition of which is ordinarily that of a liquid or solid.
vare
A wand or staff of authority or justice.
vaquero
One who has charge of cattle, horses, etc.; a herdsman.
vara
A Spanish measure of length equal to about one yard. The vara now in use equals 33.385 inches.
vari
The ringtailed lemur (Lemur catta) of Madagascar. Its long tail is annulated with black and white.
vark
The bush hog, or boshvark.
vase
The body, or naked ground, of the Corinthian and Composite capital; -- called also tambour, and drum.
varvel
In falconry, one of the rings secured to the ends of the jesses.
varnish
A viscid liquid, consisting of a solution of resinous matter in an oil or a volatile liquid, laid on work with a brush, or otherwise.
vartabed
A doctor or teacher in the Armenian church. Members of this order of ecclesiastics frequently have charge of dioceses, with episcopal functions.
vary
To change to something else; to transmute; to exchange; to alternate.
vascular
Consisting of, or containing, vessels as an essential part of a structure; full of vessels; specifically (Bot.
vast
Waste; desert; desolate; lonely.
vasiform
Having the form of a vessel, or duct.
vassal
The grantee of a fief, feud, or fee; one who holds land of superior, and who vows fidelity and homage to him; a feudatory; a feudal tenant.
vatful
As much as a vat will hold; enough to fill a vat.
vasum
A genus including several species of large marine gastropods having massive pyriform shells, with conspicuous folds on the columella.
vatical
Of or pertaining to a prophet; prophetical.
vers
A verse or verses.  See Verse.
velum
Curtain or covering; -- applied to various membranous partitions, especially to the soft palate. See under Palate.
veer
To change direction; to turn; to shift; as, wind veers to the west or north.
veadar
The thirteenth, or intercalary, month of the Jewish ecclesiastical calendar, which is added about every third year.
vaut
To vault; to leap.
vault
An arched structure of masonry, forming a ceiling or canopy.
vaunt
To boast; to make a vain display of one's own worth, attainments, decorations, or the like; to talk ostentatiously; to brag.
vavasory
The quality or tenure of the fee held by a vavasor; also, the lands held by a vavasor.
vaward
The fore part; van.
vedanta
A system of philosophy among the Hindus, founded on scattered texts of the Vedas, and thence termed the "Anta," or end or substance.
veal
The flesh of a calf when killed and used for food.
vecture
The act of carrying; conveyance; carriage.
vedette
A sentinel, usually on horseback, stationed on the outpost of an army, to watch an enemy and give notice of danger; a vidette.
vedro
A Russian liquid measure, equal to 3.249 gallons of U. S. standard measure, or 2.706 imperial gallons.
vein
One of the vessels which carry blood, either venous or arterial, to the heart. See Artery, 2.
vehemence
The quality pr state of being vehement; impetuous force; impetuosity; violence; fury; as, the vehemence.
vega
A brilliant star of the first magnitude, the brightest of those constituting the constellation Lyra.
vegetable
Of or pertaining to plants; having the nature of, or produced by, plants; as, a vegetable nature; vegetable growths, juices, etc.
vehicle
That in or on which any person or thing is, or may be, carried, as a coach, carriage, wagon, cart, car, sleigh, bicycle, etc.
veil
Something hung up, or spread out, to intercept the view, and hide an object; a cover; a curtain; esp.
veliferous
Carrying or bearing sails.
velar
Of or pertaining to a velum; esp. (Anat.) of or pertaining to the soft palate.
velella
Any species of oceanic Siphonophora belonging to the genus Velella.
vell
The salted stomach of a calf, used in making cheese; a rennet bag.
velours
One of many textile fabrics having a pile like that of velvet.
veracious
Observant of truth; habitually speaking truth; truthful; as, veracious historian.
venene
Poisonous; venomous.
vend
The act of vending or selling; a sale.
velveret
A kind of velvet having cotton back.
venal
Of or pertaining to veins; venous; as, venal blood.
veneer
To overlay or plate with a thin layer of wood or other material for outer finish or decoration; as, to veneer a piece of furniture with mahogany.
vennation
The act of poisoning.
venom
Spite; malice; malignity; evil quality. Chaucer.
venge
To avenge; to punish; to revenge.
veniable
Venial; pardonable.
vent
Sale; opportunity to sell; market.
venue
A neighborhood or near place; the place or county in which anything is alleged to have happened; also, the place where an action is laid.
verge
A rod or staff, carried as an emblem of authority; as, the verge, carried before a dean.
verbosity
The quality or state of being verbose; the use of more words than are necessary; prolixity; wordiness; verbiage.
verb
A word; a vocable.
verify
To make into a verb; to use as a verb; to verbalize.
verd
The privilege of cutting green wood within a forest for fuel.
verecund
Rashful; modest.
vermeil
Vermilion; also, the color of vermilion, a bright, beautiful red.
veridical
Truth-telling; truthful; veracious.
verjuice
The sour juice of crab apples, of green or unripe grapes, apples, etc.; also, an acid liquor made from such juice.
veronese
Of or pertaining to Verona, in Italy.
vernacle
See Veronica, 1.
verrucose
Covered with wartlike elevations; tuberculate; warty; verrucous; as, a verrucose capsule.
viary
Of or pertaining to roads; happening on roads.
vetiver
An East Indian grass (Andropogon muricatus); also, its fragrant roots which are much used for making mats and screens.
vespa
A genus of Hymenoptera including the common wasps and hornets.
very
True; real; actual; veritable.
vert
Everything that grows, and bears a green leaf, within the forest; as, to preserve vert and venison is the duty of the verderer.
vervain
Any plant of the genus Verbena.
vese
Onset; rush; violent draught or wind.
vesical
Of or pertaining to the bladder.
vesuvian
Of or pertaining to Vesuvius, a volcano near Naples.
vessel
Any tube or canal in which the blood or other fluids are contained, secreted, or circulated, as the arteries, veins, lymphatics, etc.
vest
An article of clothing covering the person; an outer garment; a vestment; a dress; a vesture; a robe.
vetch
Any leguminous plant of the genus Vicia, some species of which are valuable for fodder. The common species is V.
veteran
One who has been long exercised in any service or art, particularly in war; one who has had.
vexillary
Of or pertaining to an ensign or standard.
vetust
Venerable from antiquity; ancient; old.
veto
An authoritative prohibition or negative; a forbidding; an interdiction.
vettura
An Italian four-wheeled carriage, esp. one let for hire; a hackney coach.
vexation
The act of vexing, or the state of being vexed; agitation; disquiet; trouble; irritation.
vexed
Annoyed; harassed; troubled.
vial
A small bottle, usually of glass; a little glass vessel with a narrow aperture intended to be closed with a stopper; as, a vial of medicine.
viability
The quality or state of being viable.
viage
A voyage; a journey.
viameter
An odometer; -- called also viatometer.
viand
An article of food; provisions; food; victuals; -- used chiefly in the plural.
vide
Imperative sing. of L. videre, to see; -- used to direct attention to something; as, vide supra, see above.
viinage
The place or places adjoining or near; neighborhood; vicinity; as, a jury must be of the vicinage.
vibrancy
The state of being vibrant; resonance.
viatecture
The art of making roads or ways for traveling, including the construction of bridges, canals, viaducts, etc.
vibices
More or less extensive patches of subcutaneous extravasation of blood.
vicar
One deputed or authorized to perform the functions of another; a substitute in office; a deputy.
vice
A defect; a fault; an error; a blemish; an imperfection; as, the vices of a political constitution; the vices of a horse.
victim
A living being sacrificed to some deity, or in the performance of a religious rite; a creature immolated, or made an offering of.
vicine
Near; neighboring; vicinal.
vicontiel
Of or pertaining to the viscount or sheriff of a country.
vicugna
A South American mammal (Auchenia vicunna) native of the elevated plains of the Andes, allied to the llama but smaller.
vidame
One of a class of temporal officers who originally represented the bishops, but later erected their offices into fiefs, and became feudal nobles.
vifda
In the Orkney and Shetland Islands, beef and mutton hung and dried, but not salted.
vielle
An old stringed instrument played upon with a wheel; a hurdy-gurdy.
vidonia
A dry white wine, of a tart flavor, produced in Teneriffe; -- called also Teneriffe.
viduage
The state of widows or of widowhood; also, widows, collectively.
viennese
Of or pertaining to Vienna, or people of Vienna.
view
The act of seeing or beholding; sight; look; survey; examination by the eye; inspection.
vignette
A running ornament consisting of leaves and tendrils, used in Gothic architecture.
vigesimal
Twentieth; divided into, or consisting of, twenties or twenty parts.
vigil
Hence, devotional watching; waking for prayer, or other religious exercises.
viking
One belonging to the pirate crews from among the Northmen, who plundered the coasts of Europe in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries.
vigonia
Of or pertaining to the vicu/a; characterizing the vicu/a; -- said of the wool of that animal, used in felting hats, and for other purposes.
vilayet
One of the chief administrative divisions or provinces of the Ottoman Empire; -- formerly called eyalet.
wagati
A small East Indian wild cat (Felis wagati), regarded by some as a variety of the leopard cat.
vodka
A Russian drink distilled from rye.
visa
To indorse, after examination, with the word vise, as a passport; to vise.
vinquish
See Vanquish, n.
vincentian
Of or pertaining to Saint Vincent de Paul, or founded by him.
vimen
A long, slender, flexible shoot or branch.
vilifier
One who vilifies or defames.
vill
A small collection of houses; a village.
viminal
Of or pertaining to twigs; consisting of twigs; producing twigs.
vinaceous
Belonging to, or like, wine or grapes.
vingtun
Contraction for Vingt et un.
vindemial
Of or pertaining to a vintage, or grape harvest.
vine
Any woody climbing plant which bears grapes.
vinic
Of or pertaining to wine; as, vinic alcohol.
vinolent
Given to wine; drunken; intemperate.
vire
An arrow, having a rotary motion, formerly used with the crossbow.  Cf. Vireton.
viol
A large rope sometimes used in weighing anchor.
vintage
The produce of the vine for one season, in grapes or in wine; as, the vintage is abundant; the vintage of 1840.
viny
Of or pertaining to vines; producing, or abounding in, vines.
viper
Any one of numerous species of Old World venomous makes belonging to Vipera, Clotho, Daboia, and other genera of the family Viperidae.
viraginian
Of or pertaining to a virago; having the qualities of a virago.
virole
A ring surrounding a bugle or hunting horn.
virgalieu
A valuable kind of pear, of an obovate shape and with melting flesh of delicious flavor; -- more properly called White Doyenne.
viridite
A greenish chloritic mineral common in certain igneous rocks, as diabase, as a result of alternation.
virtu
A love of the fine arts; a taste for curiosities.
virulency
The quality or state of being virulent or venomous; poisonousness; malignancy.
vitta
One of the oil tubes in the fruit of umbelliferous plants.
visto
A vista; a prospect.
visibility
The quality or state of being visible.
visceral
Of or pertaining to the viscera; splanchnic.
vise
An instrument consisting of two jaws, closing by a screw, lever, cam, or the like, for holding work, as in filing.
visne
Neighborhood; vicinity; venue.  See Venue.
visor
A part of a helmet, arranged so as to lift or open, and so show the face. The openings for seeing and breathing are generally in it.
vitelline
Of or pertaining to the yolk of eggs; as, the vitelline membrane, a smooth, transparent membrane surrounding the vitellus.
visual
Of or pertaining to sight; used in sight; serving as the instrument of seeing; as, the visual nerve.
vital
Belonging or relating to life, either animal or vegetable; as, vital energies; vital functions; vital actions.
viticulose
Having long and slender trailing stems.
vitrella
One of the transparent lenslike cells in the ocelli of certain arthropods.
vizard
A mask; a visor.
vive
Long live, that is, success to; as, vive le roi, long live the king; vive la bagatelle, success to trifles or sport.
vituline
Of or pertaining to a calf or veal.
vivace
Brisk; vivacious; with spirit; -- a direction to perform a passage in a brisk and lively manner.
vivid
True to the life; exhibiting the appearance of life or freshness; animated; spirited; bright; strong; intense; as, vivid colors.
vixen
A cross, ill-tempered person; -- formerly used of either sex, now only of a woman.
vocable
A word; a term; a name; specifically, a word considered as composed of certain sounds or letters, without regard to its meaning.
vizier
A councilor of state; a high executive officer in Turkey and other Oriental countries.
vlissmaki
The diadem indris.  See Indris.
vocule
A short or weak utterance; a faint or feeble sound, as that heard on separating the lips in pronouncing p or b.
vociferant
Noisy; clamorous.
vodanium
A supposed element, afterward found to be a mixture of several metals, as copper, iron, lead, nickel, etc.
voussoir
One of the wedgelike stones of which an arch is composed.
volt
A circular tread; a gait by which a horse going sideways round a center makes two concentric tracks.
vole
A deal at cards that draws all the tricks.
void
Containing nothing; empty; vacant; not occupied; not filled.
vogue
Influence; power; sway.
voice
The tone or sound emitted by anything.
volacious
Apt or fit to fly.
volcanic
Of or pertaining to a volcano or volcanoes; as, volcanic heat.
volkslied
A popular song, or national air.
volge
The common sort of people; the crowd; the mob.
volitation
The act of flying; flight.
volley
A flight of missiles, as arrows, bullets, or the like; the simultaneous discharge of a number of small arms.
volow
To baptize; -- used in contempt by the Reformers.
voracity
The quality of being voracious; voraciousness.
vomerine
Of or pertaining to the vomer.
volubile
Turning, or whirling; winding; twining; voluble.
volva
A saclike envelope of certain fungi, which bursts open as the plant develops.
vomica
An abscess cavity in the lungs.
voodoo
One who practices voodooism; a negro sorcerer.
vote
An ardent wish or desire; a vow; a prayer.
vortex
Any one of numerous species of small Turbellaria belonging to Vortex and allied genera.  See Illustration in Appendix.
votaress
A woman who is a votary.
voting
A. & n. from Vote, v.
vouch
To call; to summon.
vying
A. & n. from Vie.
vulgar
Of or pertaining to the mass, or multitude, of people; common; general; ordinary; public; hence, in general use; vernacular.
voyol
The block through which a messenger passes.
vowel
Of or pertaining to a vowel; vocal.
voyage
The act or practice of traveling.
vugh
A cavity in a lode; -- called also vogle.
vulcan
The god of fire, who presided over the working of metals; -- answering to the Greek Hephaestus.
vultern
The brush turkey (Talegallus Lathami) of Australia.  See Brush turkey.
vulnerable
Capable of being wounded; susceptible of wounds or external injuries; as, a vulnerable body.
vulpes
A genus of Carnivora including the foxes.
vulva
The external parts of the female genital organs; sometimes, the opening between the projecting parts of the external organs.
vyce
A kind of clamp with gimlet points for holding a barrel head while the staves are being closed around it.
wading
A. & n. from Wade, v.
wacky
A soft, earthy, dark-colored rock or clay derived from the alteration of basalt.
waahoo
The burning bush; -- said to be called after a quack medicine made from it.
wabble
A hobbling, unequal motion, as of a wheel unevenly hung; a staggering to and fro.
wadd
Plumbago, or black lead.
wade
To go; to move forward.
wady
A ravine through which a brook flows; the channel of a water course, which is dry except in the rainy season.
wadmol
A coarse, hairy, woolen cloth, formerly used for garments by the poor, and for various other purposes.
wadset
A kind of pledge or mortgage.
waffle
A thin cake baked and then rolled; a wafer.
wafer
A thin cake made of flour and other ingredients.
waft
To give notice to by waving something; to wave the hand to; to beckon.
warn
To give notice to, of approaching or probable danger or evil; to caution against anything that may prove injurious.
wammel
To move irregularly or awkwardly; to wamble, or wabble.
wait
To watch; to observe; to take notice.
waid
Oppressed with weight; crushed; weighed down.
wagnerite
A fluophosphate of magnesia, occurring in yellowish crystals, and also in massive forms.
wage
To pledge; to hazard on the event of a contest; to stake; to bet, to lay; to wager; as, to wage a dollar.
waggel
The young of the great black-backed gull (Larus marinus), formerly considered a distinct species.
wagon
A wheeled carriage; a vehicle on four wheels, and usually drawn by horses; especially, one used for carrying freight or merchandise.
wagtail
Any one of many species of Old World singing birds belonging to Motacilla and several allied genera of the family Motacillidae.
wain
A four-wheeled vehicle for the transportation of goods, produce, etc.; a wagon.
waif
Hence, anything found, or without an owner; that which comes along, as it were, by chance.
wail
To choose; to select.
wair
A piece of plank two yard/ long and a foot broad.
waist
That part of the human body which is immediately below the ribs or thorax; the small part of the body between the thorax and hips.
walk
To move or go on the feet for exercise or amusement; to take one's exercise; to ramble.
waking
The act of waking, or the state or period of being awake.
waive
A waif; a castaway.
wake
The track left by a vessel in the water; by extension, any track; as, the wake of an army.
wald
A forest; -- used as a termination of names.  See Weald.
wale
A streak or mark made on the skin by a rod or whip; a stripe; a wheal.  See Wheal.
walter
To roll or wallow; to welter.
wall
A kind of knot often used at the end of a rope; a wall knot; a wale.
walm
To roll; to spout; to boil up.
waly
An exclamation of grief.
wamble
To heave; to be disturbed by nausea; -- said of the stomach.
wanze
To wane; to wither.
waniand
The wane of the moon.
wane
To be diminished; to decrease; -- contrasted with wax, and especially applied to the illuminated part of the moon.
wamp
The common American eider.
wand
A small stick; a rod; a verge.
wang
The jaw, jawbone, or cheek bone.
wanhope
Want of hope; despair; also, faint or delusive hope; delusion. [Obs.] Piers Plowman.
wanned
Made wan, or pale.
wankle
Not to be depended on; weak; unstable.
wanly
In a wan, or pale, manner.
want
Specifically, absence or lack of necessaries; destitution; poverty; penury; indigence; need.
wany
Spoiled by wet; -- said of timber.
ward
The act of guarding; watch; guard; guardianship; specifically, a guarding during the day.  See the Note under Watch, n.
wapinschaw
An exhibition of arms. according to the rank of the individual, by all persons bearing arms; -- formerly made at certain seasons in each district.
wapacut
The American hawk owl.  See under Hawk.
waped
Cast down; crushed by misery; dejected.
wapp
A rope with wall knots in it with which the shrouds are set taut.
warble
A small, hard tumor which is produced on the back of a horse by the heat or pressure of the saddle in traveling.
wariangle
The red-backed shrike (Lanius collurio); -- called also wurger, worrier, and throttler.
ware
To wear, or veer.  See Wear.
warfare
Military service; military life; contest carried on by enemies; hostilities; war.
warlike
Fit for war; disposed for war; as, a warlike state; a warlike disposition.
wark
Work; a building.
warm
Having heat in a moderate degree; not cold as, warm milk.
waxiness
Quality or state of being waxy.
wast
The second person singular of the verb be, in the indicative mood, imperfect tense; -- now used only in solemn or poetical style.
wary
Characterized by caution; guarded; careful.
warsaw
The black grouper (Epinephelus nigritus) of the southern coasts of the United States.
warp
To throw; hence, to send forth, or throw out, as words; to utter.
warrant
A writing which authorizes a person to receive money or other thing.
wart
A small, usually hard, tumor on the skin formed by enlargement of its vascular papillae, and thickening of the epidermis which covers them.
warwickite
A dark brown or black mineral, occurring in prismatic crystals imbedded in limestone near Warwick, New York.
wasite
A variety of allanite from Sweden supposed to contain wasium.
wase
A bundle of straw, or other material, to relieve the pressure of burdens carried upon the head.
wash
To cleanse by ablution, or dipping or rubbing in water; to apply water or other liquid to for the purpose of cleansing; to scrub with water, etc.
waspish
Resembling a wasp in form; having a slender waist, like a wasp.
wassail
An ancient expression of good wishes on a festive occasion, especially in drinking to some one.
wave
To play loosely; to move like a wave, one way and the other; to float; to flutter; to undulate.
watt
A unit of power or activity equal to 107 C.G.S. units of power, or to work done at the rate of one joule a second.
watch
One who watches, or those who watch; a watchman, or a body of watchmen; a sentry; a guard.
water
The fluid which descends from the clouds in rain, and which forms rivers, lakes, seas, etc.
waught
A large draught of any liquid.
waul
To cry as a cat; to squall; to wail.
wawaskeesh
The wapiti, or wapiti, or American elk.
waviness
The quality or state of being wavy.
wavy
Rising or swelling in waves; full of waves.
waxberry
The wax-covered fruit of the wax myrtle, or bayberry.  See Bayberry, and Candleberry tree.
waxen
Covered with wax; waxed; as, a waxen tablet.
weal
The mark of a stripe.  See Wale.
waygate
The tailrace of a mill.
waybill
A list of passengers in a public vehicle, or of the baggage or gods transported by a common carrier on a land route.
waxwork
Work made of wax; especially, a figure or figures formed or partly of wax, in imitation of real beings.
waxy
Resembling wax in appearance or consistency; viscid; adhesive; soft; hence, yielding; pliable; impressible.
wayed
Used to the way; broken.
wayfare
To journey; to travel; to go to and fro.
wayside
The side of the way; the edge or border of a road or path.
waylayer
One who waylays another.
waymaker
One who makes a way; a precursor.
wayward
Taking one's own way; disobedient; froward; perverse; willful.
weak
Wanting physical strength.
weazen
Thin; sharp; withered; wizened; as, a weazen face.
weasand
The windpipe; -- called also, formerly, wesil.
wean
Hence, to detach or alienate the affections of, from any object of desire; to reconcile to the want or loss of anything.
weapon
Fig.: The means or instrument with which one contends against another; as, argument was his only weapon.
weather
Vicissitude of season; meteorological change; alternation of the state of the air.
weave
To unite, as threads of any kind, in such a manner as to form a texture; to entwine or interlace into a fabric; as, to weave wool, silk, etc.
webfoot
A foot the toes of which are connected by a membrane.
webbed
Provided with a web.
weber
The standard unit of electrical quantity, and also of current.  See Coulomb, and Amp/re.
wedded
Joined in wedlock; married.
webster
A weaver; originally, a female weaver.
wedge
A piece of metal, or other hard material, thick at one end, and tapering to a thin edge at the other, used in splitting wood, rocks, etc.
wryneck
Any one of several species of Old World birds of the genus Jynx, allied to the woodpeckers; especially, the common European species (J.
wilfulness
See Willful, Willfully, and Willfulness.
wheedle
To entice by soft words; to cajole; to flatter; to coax.
wemless
Having no wem, or blemish; spotless.
wear
A dam in a river to stop and raise the water, for the purpose of conducting it to a mill, forming a fish pond, or the like.
weep
The lapwing; the wipe; -- so called from its cry.
week
A period of seven days, usually that reckoned from one Sabbath or Sunday to the next.
wednesday
The fourth day of the week; the next day after Tuesday.
weed
A garment; clothing; especially, an upper or outer garment.
weely
A kind of trap or snare for fish, made of twigs.
ween
To think; to imagine; to fancy.
weft
Imp. & p. p. of Wave.
weet
To know; to wit.
weever
Any one of several species of edible marine fishes belonging to the genus Trachinus, of the family Trachinidae.
wegotism
Excessive use of the pronoun we; -- called also weism.
weigelia
A hardy garden shrub (Diervilla Japonica) belonging to the Honeysuckle family, with white or red flowers.
wele
Prosperity; happiness; well-being; weal.
wekeen
The meadow pipit.
weird
Fate; destiny; one of the Fates, or Norns; also, a prediction.
weka
A New Zealand rail (Ocydromus australis) which has wings so short as to be incapable of flight.
welcome
Received with gladness; admitted willingly to the house, entertainment, or company; as, a welcome visitor.
weld
Coloring matter or dye extracted from this plant.
well
An issue of water from the earth; a spring; a fountain.
welfaring
Faring well; prosperous; thriving.
welk
To wither; to fade; also, to decay; to decline; to wane.
wels
The sheatfish; -- called also waller.
welt
That which, being sewed or otherwise fastened to an edge or border, serves to guard, strengthen, or adorn it
wetbird
The chaffinch, whose cry is thought to foretell rain.
wept
Imp. & p. p. of Weep.
wenny
Having the nature of a wen; resembling a wen; as, a wennish excrescence.
wench
A young woman; a girl; a maiden.
wend
To go; to pass; to betake one's self.
wenona
A sand snake (Charina plumbea) of Western North America, of the family Erycidae.
went
Imp. & p. p. of Wend; -- now obsolete except as the imperfect of go, with which it has no etymological connection.
weroole
An Australian lorikeet (Ptilosclera versicolor) noted for the variety of its colors; -- called also varied lorikeet.
were
To wear.  See 3d Wear.
wernerite
The common grayish or white variety of soapolite.
wesleyan
Of or pertaining to Wesley or Wesleyanism.
west
A country, or region of country, which, with regard to some other country or region, is situated in the direction toward the west.
whahoo
An American tree, the winged elm. (Ulmus alata).
wettish
Somewhat wet; moist; humid.
wether
A castrated ram.
westness
The quality or state of being wet; moisture; humidity; as, the wetness of land; the wetness of a cloth.
whaap
The European curlew; -- called also awp, whaup, great whaup, and stock whaup.
whack
To strike; to beat; to give a heavy or resounding blow to; to thrash; to make with whacks.
whop
To throw one's self quickly, or by an abrupt motion; to turn suddenly; as, she whapped down on the floor; the fish whapped over.
whala
To lash with stripes; to wale; to thrash; to drub.
whang
A leather thong.
what
As an exclamatory word: -- (a) Used absolutely or independently; -- often with a question following.
wharf
The bank of a river, or the shore of the sea.
wheal
A pustule; a whelk.
whopper
One who, or that which, whops.
whim
The European widgeon.
whew
A sound like a half-formed whistle, expressing astonishment, scorn, or dislike.
when
At what time; -- used interrogatively.
wheft
See Waft, n., 4.
whelk
A papule; a pustule; acne.
where
At or in what place; hence, in what situation, position, or circumstances; -- used interrogatively.
whet
To rub or on with some substance, as a piece of stone, for the purpose of sharpening; to sharpen by attrition; as, to whet a knife.
whiff
A sudden expulsion of air from the mouth; a quick puff or slight gust, as of air or smoke.
whey
The serum, or watery part, of milk, separated from the more thick or coagulable part, esp. in the process of making cheese.
which
Of what sort or kind; what; what a; who.
whig
Acidulated whey, sometimes mixed with buttermilk and sweet herbs, used as a cooling beverage.
while
Space of time, or continued duration, esp. when short; a time; as, one while we thought him innocent.
whiz
To make a humming or hissing sound, like an arrow or ball flying through the air; to fly or move swiftly with a sharp hissing or whistling sound.
whir
To whirl round, or revolve, with a whizzing noise; to fly or more quickly with a buzzing or whizzing sound; to whiz.
whin
Gorse; furze.  See Furze.
whip
To strike with a lash, a cord, a rod, or anything slender and lithe; to lash; to beat; as, to whip a horse, or a carpet.
whisk
A game at cards; whist.
whit
The smallest part or particle imaginable; a bit; a jot; an iota; -- generally used in an adverbial phrase in a negative sentence.
whole
Possessing, or being in a state of, heath and soundness; healthy; sound; well.
whoa
Stop; stand; hold.  See Ho, 2.
whoever
Whatever person; any person who; be or she who; any one who; as, he shall be punished, whoever he may be.
whom
The objective case of who.  See Who.
whoop
To utter a whoop, or loud cry, as eagerness, enthusiasm, or enjoyment; to cry out; to shout; to halloo; to utter a war whoop; to hoot, as an owl.
width
The quality of being wide; extent from side to side; breadth; wideness; as, the width of cloth; the width of a door.
wicopy
See Leatherwood.
whur
To make a rough, humming sound, like one who pronounces the letter r with too much force; to whir; to birr.
whore
A woman who practices unlawful sexual commerce with men, especially one who prostitutes her body for hire; a prostitute; a harlot.
whose
The possessive case of who or which.  See Who, and Which.
wich
A variant of 1st Wick.
wick
To strike a stone in an oblique direction.
widgeon
Any one of several species of fresh-water ducks, especially those belonging to the subgenus Mareca, of the genus Anas.
widdy
A rope or halter made of flexible twigs, or withes, as of birch.
wide
Having a great extent every way; extended; spacious; broad; vast; extensive; as, a wide plain; the wide ocean; a wide difference.
widish
Moderately wide.
widow
A woman who has lost her husband by death, and has not married again; one living bereaved of a husband.
wigged
Having the head covered with a wig; wearing a wig.
wiery
Wet; moist; marshy.
widual
Of or pertaining to a widow; vidual.
wield
To govern; to rule; to keep, or have in charge; also, to possess.
wife
A woman; an adult female; -- now used in literature only in certain compounds and phrases, as alewife, fishwife, goodwife, and the like.
wigan
A kind of canvaslike cotton fabric, used to stiffen and protect the lower part of trousers and of the skirts of women's dresses, etc.
wigwag
To signal by means of a flag waved from side to side according to a code adopted for the purpose.
wigher
To neigh; to whinny.
wigless
Having or wearing no wig.
wild
Desert; not inhabited or cultivated; as, wild land.
wike
A home; a dwelling.
wile
A trick or stratagem practiced for insnaring or deception; a sly, insidious; artifice; a beguilement; an allurement.
wolverine
A nickname for an inhabitant of Michigan.
wise
Having knowledge; knowing; enlightened; of extensive information; erudite; learned.
wink
To nod; to sleep; to nap.
wimble
An instrument for boring holes, turned by a handle.
wilne
To wish; to desire.
wiliness
The quality or state of being wily; craftiness; cunning; guile.
will
The choice which is made; a determination or preference which results from the act or exercise of the power of choice; a volition.
wilt
2d pers. sing. of Will.
wily
Full of wiles, tricks, or stratagems; using craft or stratagem to accomplish a purpose; mischievously artful; subtle.
wind
To entwist; to infold; to encircle.
wimple
A flag or streamer.
wince
To shrink, as from a blow, or from pain; to flinch; to start back.
wine
The effect of drinking wine in excess; intoxication.
wing
Any similar member or instrument used for the purpose of flying.
wipe
To rub with something soft for cleaning; to clean or dry by rubbing; as, to wipe the hands or face with a towel.
winter
The season of the year in which the sun shines most obliquely upon any region; the coldest season of the year.
winner
One who wins, or gains by success in competition, contest, or gaming.
winsome
Cheerful; merry; gay; light-hearted.
winy
Having the taste or qualities of wine; vinous; as, grapes of a winy taste.
winze
A small shaft sunk from one level to another, as for the purpose of ventilation.
wiriness
The quality of being wiry.
wirble
To whirl; to eddy.
wire
A telegraph wire or cable; hence, an electric telegraph; as, to send a message by wire.
wiry
Made of wire; like wire; drawn out like wire.
wisdom
The results of wise judgments; scientific or practical truth; acquired knowledge; erudition.
witted
Having (such) a wit or understanding; as, a quick-witted boy.
witch
A cone of paper which is placed in a vessel of lard or other fat, and used as a taper.
wisp
A small bundle, as of straw or other like substance.
wish
To have a desire or yearning; to long; to hanker.
wisket
A whisket, or basket.
wisse
To show; to teach; to inform; to guide; to direct.
wistaria
A genus of climbing leguminous plants bearing long, pendulous clusters of pale bluish flowers.
with
With denotes or expresses some situation or relation of nearness, proximity, association, connection, or the like.
wite
To reproach; to blame; to censure; also, to impute as blame.
witfish
The ladyfish (a).
witless
Destitute of wit or understanding; wanting thought; hence, indiscreet; not under the guidance of judgment.
witness
Attestation of a fact or an event; testimony.
wizen
To wither; to dry.
witwall
The golden oriole.
witily
In a witty manner; wisely; ingeniously; artfully; with it; with a delicate turn or phrase, or with an ingenious association of ideas.
wittiness
The quality of being witty.
wive
To marry, as a man; to take a wife.
wizard
A wise man; a sage.
wode
Mad.  See Wood, a.
wlatsome
Loathsome; disgusting; hateful.
woad
An herbaceous cruciferous plant (Isatis tinctoria). It was formerly cultivated for the blue coloring matter derived from its leaves.
wold
A wood; a forest.
woful
Full of woe; sorrowful; distressed with grief or calamity; afflicted; wretched; unhappy; sad.
wolf
Any one of several species of wild and savage carnivores belonging to the genus Canis and closely allied to the common dog.
wound
Imp. & p. p. of Wind to twist, and Wind to sound by blowing.
word
Hence, the written or printed character, or combination of characters, expressing such a term; as, the words on a page.
wood
Mad; insane; possessed; rabid; furious; frantic.
wonder
A cause of wonder; that which excites surprise; a strange thing; a prodigy; a miracle.
woman
An adult female person; a grown-up female person, as distinguished from a man or a child; sometimes, any female person.
womb
The belly; the abdomen.
wone
To dwell; to abide.
wont
Using or doing customarily; accustomed; habituated; used.
wooingly
In a wooing manner; enticingly; with persuasiveness.
wooer
One who wooes; one who courts or solicits in love; a suitor.
woof
The threads that cross the warp in a woven fabric; the weft; the filling; the thread usually carried by the shuttle in weaving.
wool
Short, thick hair, especially when crisped or curled.
woon
Dwelling.  See Wone.
wort
A plant of any kind.
worm
A creeping or a crawling animal of any kind or size, as a serpent, caterpillar, snail, or the like.
work
Specifically: (a) That which is produced by mental labor; a composition; a book; as, a work, or the works, of Addison.
world
The earth and the surrounding heavens; the creation; the system of created things; existent creation; the universe.
worrel
An Egyptian fork-tongued lizard, about four feet long when full grown.
worse
Loss; disadvantage; defeat.
wost
2d pers. sing. pres. of Wit, to know.
worthwhile
Worth the time or effort spent.
worthy
Having worth or excellence; possessing merit; valuable; deserving; estimable; excellent; virtuous.
wottest
2d pers. sing. pres. of Wit, to know.
would
Commonly used as an auxiliary verb, either in the past tense or in the conditional or optative present.
wren
Any one of numerous species of small singing birds belonging to Troglodytes and numerous allied of the family Troglodytidae.
wrap
To snatch up; transport; -- chiefly used in the p. p. wrapt.
wrack
A thin, flying cloud; a rack.
wove
P. pr. & rare vb. n. of Weave.
wowf
Disordered or unsettled in intellect; deranged.
wraith
An apparition of a person in his exact likeness, seen before death, or a little after; hence, an apparition; a specter; a vision; an unreal image.
wrangle
To argue; to debate; to dispute.
wray
To reveal; to disclose.
wrath
Violent anger; vehement exasperation; indignation; rage; fury; ire.
wraw
Angry; vexed; wrathful.
wreak
To reck; to care.
wreck
See 2d & 3d Wreak.
writ
3d pers. sing. pres. of Write, for writeth.
wriggle
To move the body to and fro with short, writhing motions, like a worm; to squirm; to twist uneasily or quickly about.
wrest
To turn; to twist; esp., to twist or extort by violence; to pull of force away by, or as if by, violent wringing or twisting.
wretch
A miserable person; one profoundly unhappy.
wring
To twist and compress; to turn and strain with violence; to writhe; to squeeze hard; to pinch; as, to wring clothes in washing.
wrist
The joint, or the region of the joint, between the hand and the arm; the carpus.  See Carpus.
wrote
To root with the snout.  See 1st Root.
wrong
Imp. of Wring. Wrung.
wroot
Imp. of Write. Wrote.
wrung
Imp. & p. p. of Wring.
wrought
Imp. & p. p. of Work.
wrymouth
Any one of several species of large, elongated, marine fishes of the genus Cryptacanthodes, especially C.
ypsiliform
Resembling the / in appearance; -- said of the germinal spot in the ripe egg at one of the stages of fecundation.
yaup
To cry out like a child; to yelp.
xylocopa
A genus of hymenopterous insects including the carpenter.  See Carpenter bee, under Carpenter.
xeme
An Arctic fork-tailed gull (Xema Sabinii).
wynkernel
The European moor hen.
wycliffite
A follower of Wyclif, the English reformer; a Lollard.
wurbagool
A fruit bat (Pteropus medius) native of India. It is similar to the flying fox, but smaller.
wurraluh
The Australian white-quilled honey eater (Entomyza albipennis).
wyla
A helmeted Australian cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus funereus); -- called also funeral cockatoo.
wynd
A narrow lane or alley.
wyten
Pl. pres. of Wit.
wynn
A kind of timber truck, or carriage.
wype
The wipe, or lapwing.
xanthamide
An amido derivative of xanthic acid obtained as a white crystalline substance, C2H5O.CS.NH2; -- called also xanthogen amide.
xebec
A small three-masted vessel, with projecting bow stern and convex decks, used in the Mediterranean for transporting merchandise, etc.
xeriff
A gold coin formerly current in Egypt and Turkey, of the value of about  9s. 6d., or about $2.30; -- also, in Morocco, a ducat.
xenyl
The radical characteristic of xenylic compounds.
xenium
A present given to a guest or stranger, or to a foreign ambassador.
xenodochy
Reception of strangers; hospitality.
xeraphim
An old money of account in Bombay, equal to three fifths of a rupee.
xeres
Sherry.  See Sherry.
xylamide
An acid amide derivative of xylic acid, obtained as a white crystalline substance.
xeronate
A salt of xeronic acid.
xiphias
A genus of fishes comprising the common swordfish.
xylem
That portion of a fibrovascular bundle which has developed, or will develop, into wood cells; -- distinguished from phloem.
xylindein
A green or blue pigment produced by Peziza in certain kinds of decayed wood, as the beech, oak, birch, etc.
yama
The king of the infernal regions, corresponding to the Greek Pluto, and also the judge of departed souls.
yager
In the German army, one belonging to a body of light infantry armed with rifles, resembling the chasseur of the French army.
xystus
A long and open portico, for athletic exercises, as wrestling, running, etc., for use in winter or in stormy weather.
xylyl
Any one of three metameric radicals which are characteristic respectively of the three xylenes.
xyris
A genus of endogenous herbs with grassy leaves and small yellow flowers in short, scaly-bracted spikes; yellow-eyed grass.
yacca
A West Indian name for two large timber trees (Podocarpus coriaceus, and P. Purdicanus) of the Yew family.
yacht
To manage a yacht; to voyage in a yacht.
yakoots
 (Ethnol.) A nomadic Mongolian tribe native of Northern Siberia, and supposed to be of Turkish stock.
yakamilk
See Trumpeter, 3 (a).
yakin
A large Asiatic antelope (Budorcas taxicolor) native of the higher parts of the Himalayas and other lofty mountains.
yaksha
A kind of demigod attendant on Kuvera, the god of wealth.
yalah
The oil of the mahwa tree.
yard
A rod; a stick; a staff.
yank
A jerk or twitch.
yamp
An umbelliferous plant (Carum Gairdneri); also, its small fleshy roots, which are eaten by the Indians from Idaho to California.
yang
The cry of the wild goose; a honk.
yaourt
A fermented drink, or milk beer, made by the Turks.
yarage
The power of moving, or being managed, at sea; -- said with reference to a ship.
yarr
To growl or snarl as a dog.
yare
Ready; dexterous; eager; lively; quick to move.
yarn
One of the threads of which the strands of a rope are composed.
yataghan
A long knife, or short saber, common among Mohammedan nations, usually having a double curve, sometimes nearly straight.
yarwhip
The European bar-tailed godwit; -- called also yardkeep, and yarwhelp.  See Godwit.
yate
A gate.  See 1st Gate.
yfere
Together.  See Ifere.
yell
To cry out, or shriek, with a hideous noise; to cry or scream as with agony or horror.
yean
To bring forth young, as a goat or a sheep; to ean.
yawn
To open the mouth involuntarily through drowsiness, dullness, or fatigue; to gape; to oscitate.
yawd
A jade; an old horse or mare.
yawl
A small ship's boat, usually rowed by four or six oars.
ycleped
Called; named; -- obsolete, except in archaic or humorous writings.
yead
Properly, a variant of the defective imperfect yode, but sometimes mistaken for a present.  See the Note under Yede.
yedding
The song of a minstrel; hence, any song.
year
The time in which any planet completes a revolution about the sun; as, the year of Jupiter or of Saturn.
yeast
Spume, or foam, of water.
yede
Went.  See Yode.
yeldrine
The yellow-hammer; -- called also yeldrock, and yoldrin.
yerba
An herb; a plant.
yenite
A silicate of iron and lime occurring in black prismatic crystals; -- also called ilvaite.
yelp
To utter a sharp, quick cry, as a hound; to bark shrilly with eagerness, pain, or fear; to yaup.
yend
To throw; to cast.
yeoman
A common man, or one of the commonly of the first or most respectable class; a freeholder; a man free born.
yeorling
The European yellow-hammer.
yern
Eager; brisk; quick; active.
yerd
See 1st & 2d Yard.
yerk
To throw or thrust with a sudden, smart movement; to kick or strike suddenly; to jerk.
yester
Last; last past; next before; of or pertaining to yesterday.
yewen
Made of yew; as, yewen bows.
yolk
The yellow part of an egg; the vitellus.
yodle
A song sung by yodeling, as by the Swiss mountaineers.
yite
The European yellow-hammer.
ygdrasyl
See in the Dictionary of Noted Names in Fiction.
yield
To furnish; to afford; to render; to give forth.
ynambu
A South American tinamou (Rhynchotus rufescens); -- called also perdiz grande, and rufous tinamou.  See Illust.
yode
Went; walked; proceeded.
yoit
The European yellow-hammer.
yogi
A follower of the yoga philosophy; an ascetic.
yoicks
A cry of encouragement to foxhounds.
yojan
A measure of distance, varying from four to ten miles, but usually about five.
yoke
A bar or frame of wood by which two oxen are joined at the heads or necks for working together.
yorkshire
A county in the north of England.
yoni
The symbol under which Sakti, or the personification of the female power in nature, is worshiped.  Cf.
yoncopin
A local name in parts of the Mississippi Valley for the American lotus (Nelumbo lutea).
yond
Furious; mad; angry; fierce.
yonker
A young fellow; a younker.
yore
In time long past; in old time; long since.
young
Being in the first part, pr period, of growth; as, a young plant; a young tree.
yote
To pour water on; to soak in, or mix with, water.
youl
To yell; to yowl.
youth
The quality or state of being young; youthfulness; juvenility.
your
The form of the possessive case of the personal pronoun you.
yowl
To utter a loud, long, and mournful cry, as a dog; to howl; to yell.
zingel
A small, edible, freshwater European perch (Aspro zingel), having a round, elongated body and prominent snout.
zayat
A public shed, or portico, for travelers, worshipers, etc.
zamang
An immense leguminous tree (Pithecolobium Saman) of Venezuela. Its branches form a hemispherical mass, often one hundred and eighty feet across.
yule
Christmas or Christmastide; the feast of the Nativity of our Savior.
yucca
See Flicker, n., 2.
ytterbic
Pertaining to, or derived from, ytterbium; containing ytterbium.
yttria
The oxide, Y2O3, or earth, of yttrium.
yuga
Any one of the four ages, Krita, or Satya, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali, into which the Hindoos divide the duration or existence of the world.
yulan
A species of Magnolia (M. conspicua) with large white blossoms that open before the leaves.  See the Note under Magnolia.
zachun
An oil pressed by the Arabs from the fruit of a small thorny tree (Balanites Aegyptiaca), and sold to piligrims for a healing ointment.
yunx
A genus of birds comprising the wrynecks.
ywis
Certainly; most likely; truly; probably.
zaim
A Turkish chief who supports a mounted militia bearing the same name.
zain
A horse of a dark color, neither gray nor white, and having no spots.
zany
A merry-andrew; a buffoon.
zampogna
A sort of bagpipe formerly in use among Italian peasants. It is now almost obsolete.
zambo
The child of a mulatto and a negro; also, the child of an Indian and a negro; colloquially or humorously, a negro; a sambo.
zamia
A genus of cycadaceous plants, having the appearance of low palms, but with exogenous wood.  See Coontie, and Illust.
zander
A European pike perch (Stizostedion lucioperca) allied to the wall-eye; -- called also sandari, sander, sannat, schill, and zant.
zantewood
A yellow dyewood; fustet; -- called also zante, and zante fustic.  See Fustet, and the Note under Fustic.
zareba
An improvised stockade; especially, one made of thorn bushes, etc.
zaptiah
A Turkish policeman.
zaratite
A hydrous carbonate of nickel occurring as an emerald-green incrustation on chromite; -- called also emerald nickel.
zarnich
Native sulphide of arsenic, including sandarach, or realgar, and orpiment.
zarthe
A European bream (Abramis vimba).
zephyr
The west wind; poetically, any soft, gentle breeze.
zehner
An Austrian silver coin equal to ten kreutzers, or about five cents.
zebu
A bovine mammal (Ros Indicus) extensively domesticated in India, China, the East Indies, and East Africa.
zeal
Passionate ardor in the pursuit of anything; eagerness in favor of a person or cause; ardent and active interest; engagedness; enthusiasm; fervor.
zebrawood
A kind of cabinet wood having beautiful black, brown, and whitish stripes, the timber of a tropical American tree (Connarus Guianensis).
zechstein
The upper division of the Permian (Dyas) of Europe. The prevailing rock is a magnesian limestone.
zedoary
A medicinal substance obtained in the East Indies, having a fragrant smell, and a warm, bitter, aromatic taste.
zendik
An atheist or unbeliever; -- name given in the East to those charged with disbelief of any revealed religion, or accused of magical heresies.
zein
A nitrogenous substance of the nature of gluten, obtained from the seeds of Indian corn (Zea) as a soft, yellowish, amorphous substance.
zenana
The part of a dwelling appropriated to women.
zenith
Hence, figuratively, the point of culmination; the greatest height; the height of success or prosperity.
zeolite
A term now used to designate any one of a family of minerals, hydrous silicates of alumina, with lime, soda, potash, or rarely baryta.
zeus
The chief deity of the Greeks, and ruler of the upper world (cf. Hades). He was identified with Jupiter.
zeta
A Greek letter  corresponding to our z.
zero
A cipher; nothing; naught.
zest
A piece of orange or lemon peel, or the aromatic oil which may be squeezed from such peel, used to give flavor to liquor, etc.
zetetic
Seeking; proceeding by inquiry.
zeuglodont
Any species of Zeuglodonta.
zigzag
Something that has short turns or angles.
zeuzerian
Any one of a group of bombycid moths of which the genus Zeuzera is the type. Some of these moths are of large size.
ziega
Curd produced from milk by adding acetic acid, after rennet has ceased to cause coagulation.
zimb
A large, venomous, two-winged fly, native of Abyssinia. It is allied to the tsetse fly, and, like the latter, is destructive to cattle.
zillah
A district or local division, as of a province.
zinc
To coat with zinc; to galvanize.
zoophaga
An artificial group comprising various carnivorous and insectivorous animals.
zoilean
Having the characteristic of Zoilus, a bitter, envious, unjust critic, who lived about 270 years before Christ.
zoanthacea
A suborder of Actinaria, including Zoanthus and allied genera, which are permanently attached by their bases.
zion
A hill in Jerusalem, which, after the capture of that city by the Israelites, became the royal residence of David and his successors.
zinkenite
A steel-gray metallic mineral, a sulphide of antimony and lead.
zinnia
Any plant of the composite genus Zinnia, Mexican herbs with opposite leaves and large gay-colored blossoms.
zircon
A mineral occurring in tetragonal crystals, usually of a brown or gray color. It consists of silica and zirconia.
zizania
A genus of grasses including Indian rice.  See Indian rice, under Rice.
zoea
A peculiar larval stage of certain decapod Crustacea, especially of crabs and certain Anomura.
zobo
A kind of domestic cattle reared in Asia for its flesh and milk. It is supposed to be a hybrid between the zebu and the yak.
zodiac
An imaginary belt in the heavens, 16 or 18 broad, in the middle of which is the ecliptic, or sun's path.
zohar
A Jewish cabalistic book attributed by tradition to Rabbi Simon ben Yochi, who lived about the end of the 1st century, a.
zoic
Of or pertaining to animals, or animal life.
zooecium
One of the cells or tubes which inclose the feeling zooids of Bryozoa.  See Illust. of Sea Moss.
zone
A girdle; a cincture.
zokor
An Asiatic burrowing rodent (Siphneus aspalax) resembling the mole rat. It is native of the Altai Mountains.
zona
A zone or band; a layer.
zonular
Of or pertaining to a zone; zone-shaped.
zoochemy
Animal chemistry; zoochemistry.
zoolatry
The worship of animals.
zoogamous
Of or pertaining zoogamy.
zooid
Pertaining to, or resembling, an animal.
zoomelanin
A pigment giving the black color to the feathers of many birds.
zoon
An animal which is the sole product of a single egg; -- opposed to zooid.
zufolo
A little flute or flageolet, especially that which is used to teach birds.
zorilla
Either one of two species of small African carnivores of the genus Ictonyx allied to the weasels and skunks.
zoozoo
The wood pigeon.
zoosperm
One of the spermatic particles; spermatozoid.
zootic
Containing the remains of organized bodies; -- said of rock or soil.
zope
A European fresh-water bream (Abramis ballerus).
zopilote
The urubu, or American black vulture.
zounds
An exclamation formerly used as an oath, and an expression of anger or wonder.
zostera
A genus of plants of the Naiadaceae, or Pondweed family. Zostera marina is commonly known as sea wrack, and eelgrass.
zouave
One of an active and hardy body of soldiers in the French service, originally Arabs, but now composed of Frenchmen who wear the Arab dress.
zoutch
To stew, as flounders, eels, etc., with just enough or liquid to cover them.
zuche
A stump of a tree.
zygantrum
See under Zygosphene.
zumometer
See Zymic, Zymological, etc.
zuisin
The American widgeon.
zumbooruk
A small cannon supported by a swiveled rest on the back of a camel, whence it is fired, -- used in the East.
zunyite
A fluosilicate of alumina occurring in tetrahedral crystals at the Zu/i mine in Colorado.
zwanziger
An Austrian silver coin equivalent to 20 kreutzers, or about 10 cents.
zyme
The morbific principle of a zymotic disease.
zygoma
The jugal, malar, or cheek bone.
zymase
A soluble ferment, or enzyme.  See Enzyme.
zymogene
One of a physiological group of globular bacteria which produces fermentations of diverse nature; -- distinguished from pathogene.
zymic
Pertaining to, or produced by, fermentation; -- formerly, by confusion, used to designate lactic acid.
zythum
A kind of ancient malt beverage; a liquor made from malt and wheat.
